Page 1 of 84 
 
 
                                                                                                AC – 
                                                                                                Item No. –  5.10 (N) 
  
As Per NEP 2020 
 
 
University of Mumbai 
 
 
 
 
                        Title of the Program 
                 A- PG Diploma in Psychology–  
             B-  M.A. ( Psychology ) (Two Y ear)  
             C-  M.A. (Psychology) (One Y ear) – 2027-28 
                                 Syllabus for 
Semester – Sem I & II 
     Ref: GR dated 16th May, 2023 for Credit Structure of PG 
 
 
2023-24 
Page 4 of 84 
 
 
Preamble 
1) Introduction 
The MA program in psychology at the University of Mumbai provides an 
excellent blend of theory and practice, making it one of the country's oldest and 
most prestigious applied programs. The program offers rigorous academic 
coursework and highly-practical training in four specialized areas: Clinical Psychology, 
Counselling Psychology, Industrial-Organizational Psychology, and Social-Community 
Psychology. 
The program includes mandatory courses, elective courses, practicals, 
practicums in four specializations, and extensive on-job field training. Its curriculum 
is meticulously crafted to address the demands and challenges of our diverse society. 
The program has a student-centered approach, focusing on individual students and 
trying to improve their knowledge, skills, and employability. 
Personality Psychology, Psychology of Cognition and Emotion, Evolutionary 
Psychology, Social Foundations of Human Behaviour, and Positive Psychology are core 
theoretical courses that provide students with theoretical frameworks and analytical 
tools to understand human behavior and society from a psychological standpoint. 
Aside from these fundamental courses, the program contains technical papers and a 
research methods component. These papers include Statistics for Psychology, 
Experimental Psychology Practical, Psychological T esting and Psychometrics Practical. 
These papers allow students to understand the methodologies used in psychological 
sciences thoroughly. The curriculum also covers cutting-edge techniques such as data 
analytics and machine learning. 
The optional papers provide specialized training in the four specializations' 
foundations. Psychopathology Across Lifespan and Psychodiagnostics are examples of 
electives for Clinical Psychology, Counselling Across Lifespan, Assessment in 
Counselling Psychology for Counselling Psychology, Organisational Behaviour and 
Competency-Based Assessment for Industrial-Organizational Psychology, and 
Community and Social Psychology and Assessment in Social Psychology for Social-
Community Psychology. 
Page 5 of 84 
 
The course has a significant component of field placement and On-Job 
Training. The learners are placed in various organizations (Hospitals, academic 
institutions; Industries; NGOsetc.) to develop skills and become acquainted with 
varied organizations' nature, structure, and functioning.   
Overall, the MA program in psychology at the University of Mumbai delivers a 
complete education that integrates theory and practical application, preparing 
students to thrive in various fields within psychology and making them competent 
professionals for interdisciplinary dialogue. 
 
2) Aims and Objectives 
1. To  ac quai nt  s tu de nts wit h c l as si ca l and  c o nte mpo rary knowledge systems, and 
critical perspectives in psychology 
2. To  trai n st ude nts  to  de ve l o p di ffe re nt s k i ll s an d competencies required in 
different fields of applied psychology 
3. To  he lp  stude nts  a ppre c iate  t he  sc i e nti f i c  bas is  of the field of psychology and 
equip them with the necessary proficiency in the use of methodological, 
analytical and technological applications in doing psychological research 
4. To  pre pare  stu de nts  to  b e  re l e vant to  the  co mmuni ty, so that they can develop 
and use learnings from psychological science for the betterment of society and 
to solve human problems. 
5. To  ex po s e  st ude nts  to  o n  f i e ld/ jo b  traini ng , w hic h will help them gain first-hand 
experience and develop the required skills to prepare them to deal with the 
issues and challenges they would face in the world of work.  
 
3) Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will be able to understand and apply the theoretical, scientific and 
applied knowledge and skills of psychology  
2. Students will be able to design and execute research studies to advance the 
scientific know-how in the field of psychology 
3. Students will be proficient in use of psychological assessment tools and 
techniques to better understand human problems and devise appropriate 
interventions and solutions appropriately 
Page 6 of 84 
 
4. Students will be acquainted with different areas and schools of psychology in a 
way to understand the interlinkages between these areas and the holistic 
applications of the same. 
5. Students will be equipped with industry relevant skills such as applications of 
Data Analytics and Machine Learning, Psychometry, Statistical Analysis, 
Psychotherapy etc. 
 
4) Any other point (if any)  
 
5) Baskets of Electives  
 
SEM I: Electives Course 
Psychopathology Across Lifespan OR Counselling Across Lifespan OR 
Organizational Behaviour OR Community and Social Psychology 
 
SEM II: Electives Course 
Psychodiagnostics OR Assessment in Counselling Psychology OR Competency 
Based Assessment OR Assessment in Social Psychology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 7 of 84 
 
6) Credit Structure of the Program (Table as per parishist 1 with sign of HOD and Dean) 
Year 
(2Yr 
PG) 
Level  
Sem.
(2Yr) 
Major  
RM 
OJT 
/ FP 
RP Cum.Cr. Degree 
 
Mandatory* Electives Any one  
 
 
I 
 
 
6.0 
 
SemI 
Course 1 Credits 4 Personality Psychology 
Course 2 Credits 4 Psychology of Cognition and 
Emotion 
Course 3 Credits 4 Statistics for Psychology 
Course 4 Credits 2 Experimental Psychology  
Practicals 
 
Credits 4 
Psychopathology Across 
Lifespan 
OR 
Counselling Across 
Lifespan 
OR 
Organizational 
Behaviour 
OR 
Community and Social 
Psychology 
Credits 4  
 
Research 
Methodology in 
Psychology 
 
 
  2 2  PG 
Diploma(after 
3YearDegree) 
 
SemII 
Course 1 Credits 4 Evolutionary Psychology 
Course 2 Credits 4 Social Foundations of 
Human Behaviour 
Course 3 Credits 4 Positive Psychology 
Course 4 Credits 2 Psychological Testing and   
Psychometrics Practicals 
 
Credits 4 
    Psychodiagnostics 
OR 
Assessment in 
Counselling Psychology 
OR 
Competency Based 
Assessment  
OR 
Assessment in Social 
Psychology 
 Credits 4 
On the Job 
training in 
Different 
Psychology 
related work 
sectors 
 
 22 
Cum. Cr. For 
PGDiploma 28 8 4 4 
- 4 4  
 7 
 
Semester IV Structure 
 
 
 
 SEM 
IV 
Course 1: Critical and Theoretical 
Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Human Resource 
Management (4 cr) 
Course 3: Cultural Psychology (4 cr) 
Theoretical Courses  
Specialization Electives 
Course 1: Psychotherapy for 
Clinical Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 2: Career Counselling 
and World of Work (4 Cr) 
Course 3: Organizational 
Development (4 Cr) 
Course 4: Social Problems: 
Skills and Interventions (4 Cr) 
 
General Electives  
Course 5: Consumer 
Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 6: Psychology for 
Conservation and Climate 
Change (4 Cr) 
Course 7: Peace Psychology 
Course 8: CBT and REBT (4 
Cr) 
NIL NIL Research 
Project in 
Psychology 
II: Research 
Dissertation 
(6 cr) 
22  
   14 + 12 = 26 4 + 4 = 8   4 + 6 = 10 44  
 
Sign of Chairperson BoS, Psychology 
Name of Chairperson BoS, 
Psychology: Dr. Vivek Belhekar 
Name of the Faculty: Humanities 
 
Sign Dean 
Name of Dean: Dr. Anil Singh 
Name of the Faculty: Humanities 
 

Page 13 of 84 
 
Syllabus: MA Psychology   
Semester I (3277761)  Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22  
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Code: 501 11: Course 1 Credits 4 Personality Psychology 
Code: 502 11: Course 2 Credits 4 Psychology of Cognition and Emotion 
Code: 503 11: Course 3 Credits 4 Statistics for Psychology 
Code: 504 11: Course 4 Credits 2 Experimental Psychology Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Code: 505 11: Psychopathology Across Lifespan 
OR 
Code: 505 12: Counselling Across Lifespan 
OR 
Code: 505 13: Organizational Behaviour 
OR 
Code: 505 14: Community and Social Psychology 
 
Research Methodology (Credits 4) 
 Code: 506 11: Research Methodology in Psychology 
 
Semester II (3277762)  Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22  
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Code: 511 11: Course 1 Credits 4 Evolutionary Psychology 
Code: 512 11: Course 2 Credits 4 Social Foundations of Human Behaviour 
Code: 513 11: Course 3 Credits 4 Positive Psychology 
Code: 514 11: Course 4 Credits 2 Psychological Testing and Psychometrics Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Code: 515 11: Psychodiagnostics 
OR 
Code: 515 12: Assessment in Counselling Psychology 
OR 
Code: 515 13: Competency Based Assessment  
OR 
Code: 515 14: Assessment in Social Psychology         
 
On the Job Training (OJT/FP) (Credits 4) 
Code: 516 11: On the Job training in Different Psychology related work sectors 
 
 
 
 9 
Semester III   Level 6.5  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Course 1: Intervention systems and Skills of Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Biological Basis of Human Behavior (4 cr) 
Course 3: Legal Perspectives in Psychology and Praxis (4 cr) 
Course 4: Data Analytics and Machine Learning applications to Psychology (2 cr) 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Practical Courses (PC) 
Course 1: Practicum in Clinical Psychology (PC) (4 cr) 
OR 
Course 2: Practicum in Counseling Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Course 3: Practicum in Industrial and Organizational Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Course 4: Practicum in Social Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Theoretical Courses (TH)  
Course 5: Political Psychology (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 6: Behavioral Economics (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 7: Advanced Skills and Processes for counseling and Psychotherapy (TH) (4 Cr) 
 
Research Project Course (Credits 4) 
Research Project in Psychology I: Preparing Research Proposal (4 Cr) 
 
Semester IV   Level 6.5  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 12) 
Course 1: Critical and Theoretical Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Human Resource Management (4 cr) 
Course 3: Cultural Psychology (4 cr) 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Theoretical Courses  
Course 1: Psychotherapy for Clinical Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 2: Career Counselling and World of Work (4 Cr) 
Course 3: Organizational Development (4 Cr) 
Course 4: Social Problems: Skills and Interventions (4 Cr) 
Course 5: Consumer Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 6: Psychology for Conservation and Climate Change (4 Cr) 
Course 7: Peace Psychology 
Course 8: CBT and REBT (4 Cr) 
 
Research Project Course (Credits 6) 
Research Project in Psychology II: Research Dissertation (6 Cr) 
 
 
Page 49 of 84 
 
 
 
 
Semester II 
  
Page 50 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 511 11 
Course Name: EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives:  
1. To acquaint learners with fundamental concepts of evolution and Evolutionary psychology 
2. To explain various psychological aspects as a function of evolution 
3. To learn to think about human mind and its processes from an evolutionary perspective  
4. To understand specific areas and applications of Evolutionary Psychology  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
Unit 1:  
CO1: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use research methods in evolutionary 
psychology. They should be able to design study, critically evaluate earlier studies, and 
demonstrate understanding. 
CO2: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine evolution and evolutionary game 
theory and formulate an integrated understanding of them.  
Unit 2:  
CO3: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use understanding of Problems of survival in 
evolutionary psychology. They should be able to design study, critically evaluate earlier 
studies, and demonstrate understanding. 
CO4: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine, and apply long terms and short 
term sexual strategies for both sexes and formulate an integrated understanding of them.  
Unit 3:  
CO5: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use understanding of Problems of parenting 
and kinship and solutions in evolutionary psychology. They should be able to design study, 
critically evaluate earlier studies, and demonstrate understanding. 
CO6: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine, and apply understanding of 
problem of cooperation and social exchange and formulate an integrated understanding of 
them using cognitive adaptations approach.  
Unit 4:  
CO7: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use understanding of Problems of human 
aggression and solutions in evolutionary psychology. They should be able to design study, 
critically evaluate earlier studies, and demonstrate understanding. 
CO8: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine, and apply understanding of 
problem of human morality and formulate an integrated understanding of them using 
cognitive adaptations approach. Students should be able to explain, evaluate, and examine, 
and apply understanding of problem of status, prestige and social dominance and solutions in 
evolutionary psychology. 
 
Page 51 of 84 
 
 
Unit 1. Foundation of evolutionary psychology  
a. Historical development, landmarks in evolution of human beings & common 
misunderstandings  
b. Origins of human nature, evolutionary game theory.  
c. Evolution of psychological mechanism, evolutionary and psychological foundation of 
human behavior, psychological basis of culture  
d. Research methods and hypothesis-testing in evolutionary psychology, use and misuse of 
Darwinism  
Unit 2. Major aspects of evolutionary theory: survival and mating  
a. Problems of survival: food acquisition, human fearsand landscape and shelter preferences. 
b. Mate selection and sexual strategies 
c. Women’s long-term mating strategies, men’s long-term mating strategies 
d. Short-term sexual strategies across sexes  
Unit 3. Parenting and social behavior 
a. Parenting: maternal involvement, parental involvement, parent-offspring conflict  
b. Kinship: theory of implicit and inclusive fitness and empirical support 
c. Cooperation: evolution of cooperation, reciprocal altruism, 
d. Cognitive adaptations for social exchange  
Unit 4. Social behavior and specific topics  
a. Aggression as solution to adaptive problem& empirical evidence, sex differences in 
aggression, conflicts between sexes.  
b. Evolution of morality. evolution of Art. Evolution of Emotions. 
c. Cognitive development, modularity of mind, and innateness issues,  
d. Status, prestige and social dominance.  
 
Books to Study  
1. Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. (1992). The adapted mind. Oxford University 
Press. 
2. Buss, D. (2011). Evolutionary Psychology: A new Science of Mind. Pearson 
Education. 
3. Dunbar, R. I. M. (2005). Evolutionary Psychology: A Beginner's Guide. One world.  
 
 
Page 52 of 84 
 
Books for reference  
1. Buss, D. (2005). The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc 
2. Dunbar, R. and Barret, L. (2007). The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology. 
Oxford University Press. 
3. Hampton, S. (2010). Essential Evolutionary Psychology. Sage Publications Ltd. 
4. Lauser, M. (2006). Moral minds: The nature of right and wrong. Harper Collins.  
5. Pinker, S. (2006). The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. Penguin.  
6. Pinker, S. (1999). How the Mind Works. New York: WW Norton & Co. 
7. Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. Penguin. 
8. Swami, V. (2011). Evolutionary Psychology: A Critical Introduction. BPS Blackwell 
textbook  
9. Workman L. (2008). Evolutionary Psychology: An Introduction. Cambridge 
University Press. 
10. De Waal, F. B. M. (2008). Putting the altruism back into altruism: The evolution of 
empathy. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 279-300.  
11. Nesse& Ellsworth (2009). Evolution, emotions, and emotional disorders. American 
Psychologist, 64, 129-139. 
12. Tooby, J. and Cosmides, L. (2010). The Evolutionary Psychology of the Emotions 
and Their Relationship to Internal Regulatory Variables. In Lewis, M., Haviland-
Jones, J. M., & Barrett, L. F. (Eds.). Handbook of emotions (3rd edition). New York, 
NY: Guilford. 
13. Lieberman, D., Tooby, J. &Cosmides, L. (2003). Does morality have a biological 
basis? An empirical test of the factors governing moral sentiments relating to incest. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society London (Biological Sciences), 02PB0795, 1-8.  
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• One test of descriptive types within the semester: 20 marks 
• Five topics shall be displayed in the beginning of the semester. Students shall write an 
essay on one of the topic in the classroom. The topic shall be announced : 20 marks  
• Reflection Paper: 10 marks 
 
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
Page 53 of 84 
 
• Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
  
Page 54 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 512 11 
Course Name: Social Foundations of Human Behaviour 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives: 
1. To introduce the nature and scope of social psychology 
2. To familiarize the key topics/areas of social psychology as well as emerging trends 
3. To provide an understanding of embedded nature of human agency 
4. To acquaint students how principles of social psych ology are applied to real life 
situations   
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1: Students will be well acquainted with the nature and scope of social psychology 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate the knowl edge of basic processes of various social 
phenomena 
CO3: Students will be able to critically analyze various interpersonal and social relations 
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge to solve social psychological problems  
 
Unit 1. Introducing Social Psychology 
a. Social-psychological way of looking at the world 
b. Interdisciplinary flavour 
c. Core concerns, and emerging trends in social psychology 
d. Social structure and human behaviour 
Unit 2. Basic Processes 
a. Social perception: Person schema and group stereotypes   
b. Social cognition: Attribution-processes and errors 
c. Social judgment: Lasting false beliefs and their behavioural consequences  
d. Attitude: Nature of attitude and attitude change 
Unit 3. The Self and the Social Relations 
a. Status of theory and research on love  
b. Interpersonal attraction   
c. Intimate relationships and breaking up 
d. Live-in-relationship and institution of marriage in India  
Page 55 of 84 
 
Unit 4. Applications of Social psychology 
a. Social psychology and the law 
b. Implications of social psychology for health behaviour 
c. Forensic psychology: Physical attractiveness bias  
d. Social psychology and political behaviour 
Books for study 
Fiske, S.T., Gilbert, D.T., &Lindzey, G. (2010). Handbook of Social Psychology  ( 5 t h  E d . ) .  
New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 
Kruglanski, A. W., Higgins, E.T. (2007). Social Psychology: Handbook of basic Principles  
(Second Ed.). New York: The Guilford Press. 
Lesko, W. A. (2009). Readings in Social Psychology: General, Classic and  C o n t e m p o r a r y  
Selections (Eighth Ed.). New Delhi: Pearson. 
De Lamater, J.D., & Myers, D.J. (2011). Social Psychology (Seventh Ed.). USA: Wadsworth 
Fletcher, G.J.O., &Clark,M.S. (2003). Blackwell Handbook of Social Psychology: 
Interpersonal Processes. USA: Blackwell Publishers Ldt. 
Baumeister. R. F. &Finkel, E. J. (Eds.) (2010). Advanced Social Psychology: State of the 
Science. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Fletcher, G.J.O., &Clark,M.S. (2003). Blackwell Handbook of Social Psychology: 
Interpersonal Processes. USA: Blackwell Publishers Ldt. 
Baumeister. R. F. & Finkel, E. J. (Eds.) (2010). Advanced Social Psychology: State of the 
Science. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Hayward, J., & Brandon, G. (2011). Cohabitation: An  A l t e r n a t i v e  t o  M a r r i a g e ? .  J u b i l e e  
Centre, http://www. jubilee-centre. org/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Cohabitation- 
Alternative To Marriage. pdf (11.05. 2017). 
Kumar, M. (2015). Hindu Marriage no more left Sacra mental & Ceremonial, It’s Totally 
became Contractual. International Journal of Research in Humanities & S ocial Sciences , 
3(1), 5-9. 
Trost, J. (2010). The Social Institution of Marriag e. Journal of Comparative Family Studies , 
41(4), 507-514.  
 
Books for reference 
Albarracin, D., Jonson,B.T., Zanna, M.P.(2014). The Handbook of Attitudes. New York, NY: 
The Psychology Press. 
Page 56 of 84 
 
Bunk, A. P., & Van Vugt, M. (2007). Applying social psychology: From problems to 
solutions. London: Sage Publications. 
Bellack, A.S. &Hersen, M. (1998). Behavioral assessment: A Practical Handbook  (4th ed.), 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn& Bacon. 
Bromley, D.B. (1986). Case study method in Psychology and related discipl ines. Chichester: 
Wiley. 
Shaw, M. E & Wright, J. M. (1967). Scales for the Measurement of Attitude . USA: McGraw-
Hill. 
Breakwell, G.M. (2004). Doing Social Psychology Research . Malden, MA: British 
Psychological Society and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
Albarracin, D., Jonson,B.T., Zanna, M.P.(2014). The Handbook of Attitudes. New York, NY: 
The Psychology Press. 
Bodenhausen, G. V., & Gawronski, B. (2013). Attitud e change. In D. Reisberg (Ed.), The 
Oxford handbook of cognitive psychology (pp. 957-969). New York: Oxford UniversityPress.  
Eastwick, P. W. (2013). Cultural influences on attr action. In J.A. Simpson & L. Campbell 
(Eds.), 
Handbook of Close Relationships (pp.161- 182). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 Five topics shall be displayed in the beginning of the semester. Students shall write an 
essay on one of the topic in the classroom. The topics shall be announced : 20 marks 
 One test of descriptive type: 20 marks  
 One thematic paper/project/activity: 10 marks 
 
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
• Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
  
Page 57 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 513 11 
Course Name: Positive Psychology 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. To introduce history and making of positive psychology 
2. To enable students to appreciate the importance of human strengths and virtues 
3. To acquaint students with positive states, traits and institutions  
4. To provide an understanding of building better communities  
 
Course Outcomes (CO) 
CO1: Students will acquire the knowledge of making of positive psychology 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate the knowledge of pillars of positive psychology 
CO3: Students will be able to critically analyze th e relevance and need of positive 
psychology 
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge towards building better communities  
 
Unit 1. Introduction to Positive Psychology 
a. Need for a science of human strengths and virtues 
b. Deconstruction of illness ideology and inclusion of human strengths 
c. Positive Psychology: Assumptions, Goals and Definitions 
d. Three pillars of positive psychology 
  
Unit 2. Positive subjective states 
a. Subjective well-being 
b. Positive emotions 
c. The flow experience 
d. Optimism and Hope 
 
Unit 3. Positive individual traits 
a. Self-efficacy 
Page 58 of 84 
 
b. Creativity 
c. Wisdom 
d. Empathy and altruism 
 
 
Unit 4. Positive Institutions 
a. Positive schooling 
b. Aging well and role of family 
c. Psychology of forgiveness for healthy society 
d. The Me/We balance: Building better communities 
 
Evaluation 
Internal Evaluation: 50 marks 
 Essay: 20 marks 
 One Written Test: 20 marks 
 One classroom activity/quiz: 10 marks 
 
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
• Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
 
Books for study 
Snyder, C. R.; & Lopez, S. J. (2002). Handbook of Positive Psychology . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Snyder, C. R.; Lopez, S. J.; & Pedrotti, J. T. (201 1). Positive Psychology: The Scientific and 
Practical Explorations of Human Strengths. New Delhi: Sage South Asia Edition.  
References 
Seligman, M. E. P (1991). Learned Optimism. NY: Knopf. 
Seligman, M.E.P. & Csikszentmihalyi, (2000). Positi ve Psychology: An Introduction. 
American Psychologist. 55 (1),  5‐14. 
Carr, A. (2004). Positive Psychology a science of happiness and huma n strengths . NY: BR 
Publishers 
Peterson C. (2006). A Primer in Positive Psychology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Page 59 of 84 
 
Lopez, S. J.  (Ed) (2013). The Encyclopedia of Positive Psychology . UK: Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd. 
 
Seligman, M. E. P.;  Steen, T. A.;  Park, N.;  & Pe terson, C.  (2005). Positive Psychology 
Progress: Empirical Validation of Interventions. American Psychologist, 60 (5), 410-421. 
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 Five topics shall be displayed in the beginning of the semester. Students shall write an 
essay on one of the topic in the classroom. The topics shall be announced : 20 marks 
 One test of descriptive type: 20 marks  
 One thematic paper/project/activity: 10 marks 
 
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
• Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
  
Page 60 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 514 11 
Course Name: PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING AND PSYCHOMETRICS PRACTICALS 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: II   L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 02   H o u r s :  12 hrs per week per batch 
One batch = 8 students 
Course Objectives:  
1. To be aware of the role of measurement in psychology 
2. To appreciate the criteria of a good psychological test 
3. To understand necessary steps involved in test construction  
4. To value the ethical issues in psychological testing  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1: Students will be well acquainted with the nature and scope psychological testing and 
psychometrics 
CO2:Students will be able to demonstrate knowledge and skills related to psychometrics and 
test development for measuring psychological constructs 
CO3: Students will be able to critically analyze psychological measurement tools based on 
their construction, development and psychometric properties 
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge to develop psychological measurement 
tools in areas of their interest 
 
Unit 1. Theoretical-conceptual orientation  
a. Measurement in psychology and in the natural sciences 
b. Measurement theories: classical test theory, modern test theory  
c. Test construction: item analysis, reliability, validity and norms  
d. Ethical issues in psychological testing  
Unit 2. Test administration and reporting  
At least two tests pertaining to Intelligence, Motivation, Emotion, Personality and/or 
Attitude to be administered, scored and interpreted & reported. For each administered 
test, item analysis, reliability and validity, and Group norms to be computed and 
reported in the file.  
Unit 3. Test development  
Page 61 of 84 
 
Students will be divided into six groups. Each group has to choose an area by 
consensus or majority. Each student will have to develop a psychological test 
pertaining to the area chosen by the group. Every student 
In each group will present his or her ideas about developing a specific psychological 
test in the class. After these presentations, one specific psychological construct is 
selected as group’s construct. In this way, six psychological tests revolving around six 
psychological constructs are to be developed.  
 
Unit 4. Reporting of newly developed tool  
The newly developed tool has to be administered on a group of at least 30 individuals. 
The item analysis, reliability and validity, norms are to be computed and reported in 
the file.  
Books for study  
1. Kline, P. (1998). The New Psychometrics: Science, psychology and measurement. 
New York: Routledge. 
2. Kline, T. J. (2005). Psychological testing: A practical approach to design and 
evaluation. Sage publications. 
3. Furr, M. (2011). Scale construction and psychometrics for social and personality 
psychology. Scale Construction and Psychometrics for Social and Personality 
Psychology, 1-160. 
4. Chadha, N. K. (2009). Applied Psychometry. New Delhi: Sage.  
5. Anastasi, A., & Urbina, S. (1997). Psychological Testing (Seventh Ed.). New Delhi: 
Prentice Hall.  
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks  
       •    Supervised laboratory work: 10 marks  
• Psychological Assessment File: 20 marks  
• Viva voce examination for the self‐constructed test: 20 marks  
Semester end Practical examination: 50 marks.  
• Viva-voce examination: 35 marks 
• Instruction and Conduction: 05 marks 
• Report: 10 marks  
 
Page 62 of 84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Semester II: Elective Course  
 
 
  
Page 63 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 515 11 
Course Name: Psychodiagnostics 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives:  
1. Familiarizing students with various assessment approaches and tools used in clinical 
psychology domains. 
2. Training students to select, administer, score and interpret various types of psychological 
tools.  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
Unit 1:  
CO1: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use Psychological testing approaches and test 
choice rationales in psychodiagnostics. They should be able to critically evaluate, and 
demonstrate understanding. 
CO2: Students are able to able to carry out behavioral assessment, clinical observation, 
history taking, MSE, MMSE and demonstrate Ethical practice in assessment.  
Unit 2:  
CO3: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine theoretical understanding of various 
assessment systems for children used in clinical psychology.  
CO4: Students are able to explain, evaluate, administer and score and interpret various 
assessment systems for children used in clinical psychology.   
Unit 3:  
CO5: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine theoretical understanding of various 
personality assessment systems used clinical psychology like MMPI, MCMI, and projective 
instruments.  
CO6: Students are able to explain, evaluate, administer and score and interpret various 
personality assessment systems used clinical psychology like MMPI, MCMI, and projective 
instruments.   
Unit 4:  
CO7: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine theoretical understanding of various 
rating scales and batteries used clinical psychology like, BDI, BSS, BHS SCL-90-R, CARS, 
SCID, PANSS, NIMHANS battery, AIIMS battery, etc.  
CO8: Students are able to explain, evaluate, administer and score and interpret various rating 
scales and batteries used clinical psychology like, BDI, BSS, BHS SCL-90-R, CARS, SCID, 
PANSS, NIMHANS battery, AIIMS battery, etc. 
 
 
 
Page 64 of 84 
 
Unit 1. Principles of psychological evaluation  
a. Psychological testing approaches and test choice rationales. 
b. Behavioral assessment, clinical observation, history taking, MSE, MMSE.  
c. Ethical practice in assessment. 
d. Tests, rating scales, test batteries.  
Unit 2. Assessment of development and ability  
a. Child developmental assessment: VSMS, Seguin form board, Bayley scales, other 
developmental scales.  
b. Child cognitive assessment: WISC all editions, Kamat Binet, Bhatia battery, 
Ravens’ progressive matrices, MISIC, assessment for learning disabilities, woodcock 
johnson test, WRAT test.  
c. Adult cognitive assessment: WAIS all versions, WAPIS, WMS all versions.  
d. Clinical interpretations of profiles scatter analysis, differential diagnosis.  
Unit 3. Assessment of personality  
a. Objective tests of personality: MMPI all versions, MCMI, five factor tests.  
b. Projective tests of personality for adults: Rorschach inkblot method, Thematic 
Apperception Test, other techniques.  
c. Projective techniques for children: children’s apperception test, drawing as 
projection, projective play, sacks sentence completion test, HTP, DAP, other 
projective methods.  
d. Test combinations, profile interpretation and report writing, medicolegal issues.  
Unit 4. Rating scales and test batteries  
a. Clinical rating scales: BDI, BSS, BHS, HDRS, HARS, BPRS, SIDP, SCL-90-R, 
CARS, Conners rating scale, Indian Scale for Assessment of Autism and other rating 
scales.  
b. Research rating scales, SCID, PANSS, SAPS, SANS, PSE and other rating scales. 
c. Neuropsychological batteries: NIMHANS battery, AIIMS battery, PGI battery and 
others.  
d. Bender Gestalt Test, Lobe testing, testing for specific neuropsychological 
conditions.  
Books for Study  
1. Bellack, A.S. and Hersen, M. (Ed.s) (1998) Behavioral assessment A Practical 
Handbook (4th ed.). MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
2. Goldstein, G. and Hersen, M. (Ed.) (2000) Handbook of Psychological Assessment 
Page 65 of 84 
 
. (3rded). Oxford: Elsevier science.  
3. Hersen, M. (2004).Comprehensive Handbook of Psychological Assessment (Vol. 
4). Industrial and Organizational assessment. New York, NY: Wiley.  
Books for reference  
Manuals of various tests and scales covered.  
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• One test of descriptive types within the semester: 20 marks each 
• Scoring profile and report of 5 tests (one time OR distributed over time): 20 marks  
• Viva with role play on tests: 10 marks 
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
• Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
  
Page 66 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 515 12 
Course Name: Assessment in Counselling Psychology 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Acquainting students with various assessment approaches and tools. 
2. Training students to select, administer, score and interpret various types of 
psychological tests. 
3. Understanding the advances and applications of assessment. 
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1: Students will be well acquainted with the nature, purpose and use of different 
assessment tools used in counselling psychology 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate the skills and knowledge required to administer 
and interpret the psychological tests and other assessment methods in counselling 
psychology. 
CO3: Students will be able to critically review use of psychological assessment tools and 
their limitations, and make related decisions to its use. 
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge and competency of psychological 
assessment tools in real life settings and working with counselling clients. 
 
Unit 1. Introduction to psychological assessment 
a. History of psychological assessment 
b. Nature and scope of psychological assessment. 
c. Non- standardized techniques of assessment: behavioral observation, interview, case 
history. 
d. Ethical and professional standards for tests. 
 
Page 67 of 84 
 
Unit 2. Assessment of ability and aptitude 
a. Assessment of intelligence: WISC all editions, WAIS, Kamat Binet, Bhatia battery, 
Ravens’ progressive matrices. 
b. Assessment of aptitude: DAT, David’s Battery of Differential Abilities (DBDA),  
c. Assessment of development: VSMS ,Seguine form board, Bayley’s Scales 
d. Assessment of children with learning disabilities. 
 
Unit 3. Assessment of Personality 
a. Personality assessment: CPQ, HSPQ, 16 PF, NEO –PI -3. 
b. Projective tests of personality : CAT, TAT, Rosenzweig picture frustration study (adult 
and children ), HTP 
c. Assessment of social desirability and other issues in personality assessment. 
d. Assessment of interests: Strong Campbell Interest inventory, Holland’s self-directed 
search. 
 
Unit 4. Assessment in other related areas 
a. Computer and ICT assisted assessment 
b. Issues in competency assessment 
c. Psychological assessment and planning interventions 
d. Psychological interpretation and report writing 
 
Books for study 
1. Bellack, A.S. &Hersen, M. (1998). Behavioral assessment: A Practical Handbook (4th 
ed). M.A.: Allyn and Bacon. 
2. McHenry, B., MacCluskie, K. C., & McHenry, J. (Eds.). (2018). Tests and assessments 
in counseling: a case-by-case exploration. Routledge. 
3. Hays, D. G. (2017). Assessment in counseling: Procedures and practices. John Wiley & 
Sons. 
4. Coaley, K. (2009). An introduction to Psychological Assessment and Psychometrics. 
New Delhi : Sage Publications. 
5. Goldstein, G. &Hersen, M. (2000). Handbook of Psychological Assessment (3rd ed). 
Oxford : Elsevier Science. 
6. Groth-Marnat, G & Wright, A.J. (2016). Handbook of Psychological Assessment (6th 
ed.). Wiley. 
Page 68 of 84 
 
7. Hersen, M. (2004). Comprehensive Handbook of Psychological Assessment (Vol.4). 
industrial and Organizational Assessment NY : Wiley 
8. Walsh, W.B. & Betz. N.E. (1985). Tests and Measurement. New Jersey : Prentice Hall, 
Inc. 
9. Kaslow, N.J., Rubin, N.J., Bebeau, M.J., Leigh, I.W., Lichtenberg, J.W., Nelson, P.D., 
Portnoy, S.M., & Smith, I.L. (2007). Guiding Principles and Recommendations for the 
Assessment of Competence. Professional Psychology: research and Practice, 38 (5), 
441 – 451. 
10. Manuals of various tests and scales covered. 
Books for reference 
1. Fernandez – Ballestros, R. (2003). Encylopedia of Psychological Assessment (1st ed. 
Vol. 1 and 2.). new Delhi : Sage Publications. 
2. Dodd,s. (2005). Understanding autism. Australia :Elsevie 
3. Niles, S. & Harris-Bowlsbey, J. (2016). Career development interventions in the 21st 
century (4thed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education. 
4. Bor, R., Jo Bbner – Landy, Gilli, S., & Brace, C. (2002). Counseling in Schools. New 
Delhi : sage Publications Ltd 
5. Geldard, K., & Geldard, D. (2004). Counselling Adolescents. New Delhi: sage 
Publications. 
6. Wong, B., & Butler, D. L. (2012). Learning about learning disabilities (4th ed.). Elsevier 
Academic press 
7. Larimer, M.P. (2005). Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Research Devlopments. 
Hauppauge, N.Y: Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
8. Selikowitz, M. (1998). Dyslexia and other Learning Difficulties: the Facts. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press. 
9. O’Regan, J.F (2005). Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. Bloombury Academic 
 
 
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks  
Class Presentations OR  Viva: 15 marks 
Essay: 15 marks 
One Written test: 20 marks each 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Page 69 of 84 
 
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question that could combine more than 
one unit 
  
Page 70 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 515 13 
Course Name: Competency Based Assessment in Organization 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. To acquaint the students with the concept of competence and competency atwork 
2. To learn the various steps, methods and application ofcompetency 
3. To acquaint the students with competency based application in HR Planning, 
Recruitment and Selection, Employee Training, Performance management, 
development, careerpathing andcompensation 
4. To develop the understanding of assessment centermethodology 
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1: Students will acquire knowledge about the relevance of Competency based Assessment 
in organizations 
CO2: They will be able to develop a competency framework and dictionary 
CO3: Students will be competent in developing the necessary steps of competency based 
processes in organizations in accordance with legal guidelines 
CO4: Develop understanding of diverse methods of assessments in organizations 
 
Unit 1. Introduction to Competency Based Assessment 
a. Definition and importance of competencies 
b. Significance and Classification of Competency Frameworks 
c. Contemporary approaches toassessment 
d. Competencies for corporateadvantage 
 
Unit 2. Definition, Steps, Methods and Application of competency 
a. Categorizing competencies 
b. Developing competency dictionary, competency description and competencylevels 
c. Building an Organization-wide Competency Model: Key Stages 
Page 71 of 84 
 
d. Competency management methods: critical incident interview method, 
behavioralevent interview, expert panel, threshold scales &repertorygrid 
 
Unit 3. Competency based application 
a. Integrating competencies into recruitment, selection and other HR processes 
b. Competency based Employee Training, Performance Management and 
SuccessionPlanning 
c. Competency based Development and CareerPathing 
d. Competency basedCompensation 
 
Unit 4. Assessment center 
a. Assessment Centers: Process, pillars, benefits, feedback and documentation  
b. Types of exercises in assessmentcenters 
c. Life after the AssessmentCenter 
d. Future Trends in Competency-Based Assessment 
 
Books for Reference 
1. Boyatzis, R.E (1982).The Competent Manager . A Model for Effective Performance. 
New Y ork , NY : John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Dubois, D.D and Rothwell, W.J, King D.J and Kemp, L.K (2004) 
Competency Based Human Resource Management. Davies-Black 
Publishing, California. 
3. Lawler, E.E. III., Nadler, D.A. &Cammann, C. (1980).Organizational Assessment. 
New Y ork , NY : John Wiley & Sons 
4. Sanghi, S. (2004).The Handbook of Competency Mapping. New 
Delhi:Response Books, Sage Publications. 
5. Sanghi, S. (2009).The Handbook of Competency Mapping: Understanding 
Designing and Implementing Competency Models in Organizations. New Delhi: 
Response Business Books, Sage Publications. 
6. Sawardekar, N. (2002).Assessment Centres: Identifying Potential and Developing 
Competency. New Delhi: Response Books, Sage Publications. 
7. Shermon, G. (2004).Competency based HRM. New Delhi:Tata-McGraw Hill. 
8. Spencer, Jr. L.M. & Spencer, S.M. (1993).Competence at Work. New Y ork, NY: 
Wiley & Sons Inc.  
Page 72 of 84 
 
9. Thorton, III, G.C. &Rupp, D.E. (2006).Assessment Centers in Human Resource 
Management: Strategies for Prediction, Diagnosis and Development. London: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
 
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• Presentation: 30 marks 
• Written Test: 20 marks 
 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question that could combine more than 
one unit. 
  
Page 73 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 515 14 
Course Name: Assessment in Social Psychology 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. To train students to understand assessment process, techniques and issues pertaining 
to different areas of social relevance 
2. To acquaint students with administration, scoring and interpretation of standardized 
psychological tools 
 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Students will acquire the knowledge basic issues in psychological assessment 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate the skill  of administering and interpreting various 
assessment tools 
CO3: Students will be able to critically analyze the role of assessment in interventions  
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge to the areas of social relevance 
 
Unit 1. Basic issues in social psychological assessment 
a. Qualitative versus quantitative data in social psychology 
b. Methodological problems  
c. Ethical consideration 
d. Opportunities and challenges in online testing 
  
Unit 2. Assessment methods using qualitative approach 
a. Case study of client: method of assessment  
b. Focus groups discussion 
c. Implicit methods in social psychology  
d. Sociometry: importance and overview of sociometric assessment procedures  
 
Unit 3. Tools for assessment in following areas  
a. Children: CAT, Draw-a-man, CPM/SPM, CPQ, WISC  
b. Adults: TAT, HTP 
Page 74 of 84 
 
c. Family: Kinetic family drawings technique, Couples Satisfaction Index (CSI) 
d. Industry: firo-b and cognitive mapping  
 
 
Unit 4. Assessment in following areas of social relevance 
a. Attitude: measurement of attitudes, Implicit Association Test (IAT)  
b. Well-being: assessment of psychological and social wellbeing  
c. Alcohol and drug specialty assessment instrument and drug detection testing  
d. Disability: psychological, vocational and functional assessment  
 
 
Books for study  
 Breakwell, G.M. (2004). Doing Social Psychology Research. Malden, MA: British 
Psychological Society and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
Whitcomb, S.A. &Merrell, K.W. (2013). Behavioural, Social and Emotional Assessment of 
Children and Adolescents (4th ed). Oxon, OX: Routledge.  
Albarracin, D., Jonson,B.T., Zanna, M.P.(2014). The Handbook of Attitudes. New York, NY: 
The Psychology Press.  
Gawali, G. (2012). Vocational Rehabilitation of Persons with Disability: Psychosocial and 
Legal Perspectives (Ed.). Mumbai: Himalaya Publications.  
Juhnke, G.A. (2002). Substance abuse assessment and diagnosis: a comprehensive guide for 
counsellors and helping professionals. New York, NY: Brunner- Routledge.  
Bunk, A. P., & Van Vugt, M. (2007). Applying social psychology: From problems to 
solutions. London: Sage Publications.  
Burns, R., & Kaufman, S. (1970).  Actions, Styles and Symbols in Kinetic Family drawings 
(KFD): An Interpretive Manual. New York: Brunner/Mazel. 
Funk, J. L. & Rogge, R. D. (2007). Testing the rule r with item response theory: Increasing 
precision of measurement for relationship satisfact ion with the Couples Satisfaction 
Index. Journal of Family Psychology, 21, 572-583. 
 
 
 
Books for reference  
Page 75 of 84 
 
Bellack, A.S. &Hersen, M. (1998).Behavioral assessment : A Practical Handbook (4th ed.), 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.  
 Bromley, D.B. (1986). Case study method in Psychology and related disciplines. Chichester: 
Wiley.  
Coaley,K.(2009). An introduction to Psychological Assessment and Psychometrics. New 
Delhi: Sage Publications.  
Shaw, M. E & Wright, J. M. (1967). Scales for the Measurement of Attitude. USA: McGraw-
Hill.  
 
Evaluation 
Internal Evaluation (50 marks): 
Two classroom presentations for each student during the course-work, each 
presentation carrying 25 Marks. 
 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question that could combine more than 
one unit. 
 
  
Page 76 of 84 
 
 
 
 
Semester II 
On the Job Training/ Field Project 
(OJT/FP) 
 
  
Page 77 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 516 11 
Course Name: On the Job training in Different Psychology related Work Sectors 
Type of course: On the Job Training/ Field Project (OJT/FP) 
SEMESTER: II      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives:  
• To expose students to ‘On the Job training’ in different Psychology related work 
sectors.  
• To acquaint students with all aspects related to the functioning of the world of work in 
the specific sector they are placed in.  
• To help students develop necessary skills related to working in a job set-up. 
• To help students understand challenges and realities of the field of psychology through 
first-hand experience. 
• To give students the opportunity to apply the knowledge acquired in classrooms to real 
life settings and also update themselves with through experiential knowledge on the 
job. 
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1: Students will be well acquainted with the nature of the world of work 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate their understanding of functioning, dealing with 
expectations and adapting to best practices in a job 
CO3: Students will be able to analyze oneself and develop self-awareness to ensure the areas 
one needs to improve on before he enters into the world of work. 
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge and skills acquired in the on the job 
training, to future job related avenues they venture in. 
 
Guidelines for Implementation:  
1. Coordinators would coordinate the field placement of students assigned to them. 
Page 83 of 84 
 
Syllabus: MA Psychology  
(NEP) 
 
Semester I (3277761)  Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22  
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Code: 501 11: Course 1 Credits 4 Personality Psychology 
Code: 502 11: Course 2 Credits 4 Psychology of Cognition and Emotion 
Code: 503 11: Course 3 Credits 4 Statistics for Psychology 
Code: 504 11: Course 4 Credits 2 Experimental Psychology Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Code: 505 11: Psychopathology Across Lifespan 
OR 
Code: 505 12: Counselling Across Lifespan 
OR 
Code: 505 13: Organizational Behaviour 
OR 
Code: 505 14: Community and Social Psychology 
 
Research Methodology (Credits 4) 
 Code: 506 11: Research Methodology in Psychology 
 
Semester II (3277762)  Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22  
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Code: 511 11: Course 1 Credits 4 Evolutionary Psychology 
Code: 512 11: Course 2 Credits 4 Social Foundations of Human Behaviour 
Code: 513 11: Course 3 Credits 4 Positive Psychology 
Code: 514 11: Course 4 Credits 2 Psychological Testing and Psychometrics Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Code: 515 11: Psychodiagnostics 
OR 
Code: 515 12: Assessment in Counselling Psychology 
OR 
Code: 515 13: Competency Based Assessment  
OR 
Code: 515 14: Assessment in Social Psychology         
 
On the Job Training (OJT/FP) (Credits 4) 
Code: 516 11: On the Job training in Different Psychology related work sectors 
 
 
 
Page 78 of 84 
 
2. Coordinators can choose to place the student in a specialisation related job setting or 
any other psychology related organisation and industry depending on availability, 
requirement or students interest. 
3. Student can opt to search for an internship/apprenticeship on their own, provided that 
they furnish a letter from the organisation stating that the student has been selected for 
the internship and would follow the guidelines of the academic requirement of the 
students OJT. 
4. Student would have to intern in the related work setup for minimum 4 weeks and 
maximum 6 weeks, depending on the academic calendar, completion of the second 
term and the scheduling of examinations.  
5. Supervision and training would be the sole responsibility of the organizations. Course 
Teacher/coordinator would not be required to supervise on field. However the 
coordinator will have to coordinate with the organization. 
6. Students would have to furnish a “Certificate of Completion of OJT” from the 
organization stating satisfactory completion and positive evaluation of the said student. 
7. The organization will require to fill in an Evaluation Sheet (provided by the 
Department) duly signed by a competent authority. 
8. Student would require to submit a report to the Department on the OJT which will be a 
part of the evaluation. 
 
Evaluation:  
Report evaluation by Coordinator: 50 marks 
Evaluation Sheet (to be filled by the organization): 50 marks 
 
 
  
  
Page 82 of 84 
 

M.A. (Psychology) 
 
 
 
  Sign of HOD 
  Name of the Head of the Department
Dr Satishchandra Kumar, Professor & Head
Name of the Department: Applied 
Psychology 
   
 
 
 
  
Page 9 of 84 
Syllabus 
(SEM I and SEM II) 
 
 Sign of Dean, 
Name of the Head of the Department:  
Dr Satishchandra Kumar, Professor & Head 
 Name of the Dean
Dr. Anil Singh 
Name of the Faculty
Humanities 
  
 
 
Name of the Dean:  
Name of the Faculty: 

Page 80 of 84 
 
Appendix B 
Justification for M.A. (Psychology) 
 
1. Necessity for 
starting the course:   
The MA in Psychology Programme has been meticulously 
created in accordance with the National Education Policy 
(NEP). The program strongly emphasizes the development of 
essential skills, interdisciplinarity in thinking and practice, 
employability, effective pedagogy, intellectual curiosity, 
scientific temper, creativity, and a service spirit. It provides the 
ideal balance of academic knowledge and practical 
application, ensuring students obtain rigorous disciplinary 
training while simultaneously fostering an interdisciplinarity 
approach. 
 
The program includes mandatory papers to equip learners 
with a broad understanding of psychology, while elective and 
practical components focus on developing essential skills and 
increasing employability. Students receive instruction in 
classrooms, laboratories, and on-field placements to gain 
practical hands-on experience. 
 
This education is critical for developing a professional 
workforce in psychological sciences and their practical 
applications in communities. Graduates of the program are 
prepared to engage in human services, approaching their work 
with a scientific mindset and actively participating in cutting-
edge research projects. The program seeks to develop 
professionals capable of making substantial contributions in 
both the practical and research areas by promoting a 
comprehensive understanding of psychology and its 
community applications. 
2. Whether the UGC 
has recommended 
the course:  
YES 
 
3. Whether all the 
courses have 
commenced from 
the academic year 
2023-24 
Masters Course in Psychology shall commence form the 
academic Year 2023-24. 
 
SEM I and SEM II shall commence form the academic 
Year 2023-24.  
SEM III and SEM IV shall commence form the academic 
Year 2024-25. 
4. The courses started 
by the University are 
self-financed, 
whether adequate 
number of eligible 
permanent  faculties 
The course is NOT Self-financed.  
Adequate number of eligible permanent  faculties are 
NOT recruited.  
Sanctioned faculty positions: 16 
Currently filled faculty Positions: 04 
 
Page 81 of 84 
 
are available?:  
5. To give details 
regarding the 
duration of the 
Course and is it 
possible to 
compress the 
course?: 
Two Years Full Time (Four Semesters) 
 
It is NOT possible to compress the course.  
 
6. The intake capacity 
of each course and 
no. of admissions 
given in the current 
academic year:  
Intake capacity: 100 
No. of admissions given in the current academic year: 
100 
7. Opportunities of 
Employability / 
Employment 
available after 
undertaking these 
courses:   
The course has major applied dimension. Over last many 
years, our students are well-placed in Industry, NGO, 
Hospitals, and academia. Many of them are self-
employed ‘psychologists’.  
A sizable proportion move to universities abroad for 
further education.  
 
 Sign of HOD  Sign of Dean, 
Name of the Head of the Department:  
  Dr. Satishchandra Kumar, Professor & Head 
Name of the Department: Applied Psychology 
 Name of the Dean:  
Dr. Anil Singh 
Name of the Faculty: Humanities 