Page 1 of 84 
 
 
                                                                                                AC – 
                                                                                                Item No. –  5.10 (N) 
  
As Per NEP 2020 
 
 
University of Mumbai 
 
 
 
 
                        Title of the Program 
                 A- PG Diploma in Psychology–  
             B-  M.A. ( Psychology ) (Two Y ear)  
             C-  M.A. (Psychology) (One Y ear) – 2027-28 
                                 Syllabus for 
Semester – Sem I & II 
     Ref: GR dated 16th May, 2023 for Credit Structure of PG 
 
 
2023-24 
Page 4 of 84 
 
 
Preamble 
1) Introduction 
The MA program in psychology at the University of Mumbai provides an 
excellent blend of theory and practice, making it one of the country's oldest and 
most prestigious applied programs. The program offers rigorous academic 
coursework and highly-practical training in four specialized areas: Clinical Psychology, 
Counselling Psychology, Industrial-Organizational Psychology, and Social-Community 
Psychology. 
The program includes mandatory courses, elective courses, practicals, 
practicums in four specializations, and extensive on-job field training. Its curriculum 
is meticulously crafted to address the demands and challenges of our diverse society. 
The program has a student-centered approach, focusing on individual students and 
trying to improve their knowledge, skills, and employability. 
Personality Psychology, Psychology of Cognition and Emotion, Evolutionary 
Psychology, Social Foundations of Human Behaviour, and Positive Psychology are core 
theoretical courses that provide students with theoretical frameworks and analytical 
tools to understand human behavior and society from a psychological standpoint. 
Aside from these fundamental courses, the program contains technical papers and a 
research methods component. These papers include Statistics for Psychology, 
Experimental Psychology Practical, Psychological T esting and Psychometrics Practical. 
These papers allow students to understand the methodologies used in psychological 
sciences thoroughly. The curriculum also covers cutting-edge techniques such as data 
analytics and machine learning. 
The optional papers provide specialized training in the four specializations' 
foundations. Psychopathology Across Lifespan and Psychodiagnostics are examples of 
electives for Clinical Psychology, Counselling Across Lifespan, Assessment in 
Counselling Psychology for Counselling Psychology, Organisational Behaviour and 
Competency-Based Assessment for Industrial-Organizational Psychology, and 
Community and Social Psychology and Assessment in Social Psychology for Social-
Community Psychology. 
Page 5 of 84 
 
The course has a significant component of field placement and On-Job 
Training. The learners are placed in various organizations (Hospitals, academic 
institutions; Industries; NGOsetc.) to develop skills and become acquainted with 
varied organizations' nature, structure, and functioning.   
Overall, the MA program in psychology at the University of Mumbai delivers a 
complete education that integrates theory and practical application, preparing 
students to thrive in various fields within psychology and making them competent 
professionals for interdisciplinary dialogue. 
 
2) Aims and Objectives 
1. To  ac quai nt  s tu de nts wit h c l as si ca l and  c o nte mpo rary knowledge systems, and 
critical perspectives in psychology 
2. To  trai n st ude nts  to  de ve l o p di ffe re nt s k i ll s an d competencies required in 
different fields of applied psychology 
3. To  he lp  stude nts  a ppre c iate  t he  sc i e nti f i c  bas is  of the field of psychology and 
equip them with the necessary proficiency in the use of methodological, 
analytical and technological applications in doing psychological research 
4. To  pre pare  stu de nts  to  b e  re l e vant to  the  co mmuni ty, so that they can develop 
and use learnings from psychological science for the betterment of society and 
to solve human problems. 
5. To  ex po s e  st ude nts  to  o n  f i e ld/ jo b  traini ng , w hic h will help them gain first-hand 
experience and develop the required skills to prepare them to deal with the 
issues and challenges they would face in the world of work.  
 
3) Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will be able to understand and apply the theoretical, scientific and 
applied knowledge and skills of psychology  
2. Students will be able to design and execute research studies to advance the 
scientific know-how in the field of psychology 
3. Students will be proficient in use of psychological assessment tools and 
techniques to better understand human problems and devise appropriate 
interventions and solutions appropriately 
Page 6 of 84 
 
4. Students will be acquainted with different areas and schools of psychology in a 
way to understand the interlinkages between these areas and the holistic 
applications of the same. 
5. Students will be equipped with industry relevant skills such as applications of 
Data Analytics and Machine Learning, Psychometry, Statistical Analysis, 
Psychotherapy etc. 
 
4) Any other point (if any)  
 
5) Baskets of Electives  
 
SEM I: Electives Course 
Psychopathology Across Lifespan OR Counselling Across Lifespan OR 
Organizational Behaviour OR Community and Social Psychology 
 
SEM II: Electives Course 
Psychodiagnostics OR Assessment in Counselling Psychology OR Competency 
Based Assessment OR Assessment in Social Psychology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 7 of 84 
 
6) Credit Structure of the Program (Table as per parishist 1 with sign of HOD and Dean) 
Year 
(2Yr 
PG) 
Level  
Sem.
(2Yr) 
Major  
RM 
OJT 
/ FP 
RP Cum.Cr. Degree 
 
Mandatory* Electives Any one  
 
 
I 
 
 
6.0 
 
SemI 
Course 1 Credits 4 Personality Psychology 
Course 2 Credits 4 Psychology of Cognition and 
Emotion 
Course 3 Credits 4 Statistics for Psychology 
Course 4 Credits 2 Experimental Psychology  
Practicals 
 
Credits 4 
Psychopathology Across 
Lifespan 
OR 
Counselling Across 
Lifespan 
OR 
Organizational 
Behaviour 
OR 
Community and Social 
Psychology 
Credits 4  
 
Research 
Methodology in 
Psychology 
 
 
  2 2  PG 
Diploma(after 
3YearDegree) 
 
SemII 
Course 1 Credits 4 Evolutionary Psychology 
Course 2 Credits 4 Social Foundations of 
Human Behaviour 
Course 3 Credits 4 Positive Psychology 
Course 4 Credits 2 Psychological Testing and   
Psychometrics Practicals 
 
Credits 4 
    Psychodiagnostics 
OR 
Assessment in 
Counselling Psychology 
OR 
Competency Based 
Assessment  
OR 
Assessment in Social 
Psychology 
 Credits 4 
On the Job 
training in 
Different 
Psychology 
related work 
sectors 
 
 22 
Cum. Cr. For 
PGDiploma 28 8 4 4 
- 4 4  
 7 
 
Semester IV Structure 
 
 
 
 SEM 
IV 
Course 1: Critical and Theoretical 
Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Human Resource 
Management (4 cr) 
Course 3: Cultural Psychology (4 cr) 
Theoretical Courses  
Specialization Electives 
Course 1: Psychotherapy for 
Clinical Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 2: Career Counselling 
and World of Work (4 Cr) 
Course 3: Organizational 
Development (4 Cr) 
Course 4: Social Problems: 
Skills and Interventions (4 Cr) 
 
General Electives  
Course 5: Consumer 
Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 6: Psychology for 
Conservation and Climate 
Change (4 Cr) 
Course 7: Peace Psychology 
Course 8: CBT and REBT (4 
Cr) 
NIL NIL Research 
Project in 
Psychology 
II: Research 
Dissertation 
(6 cr) 
22  
   14 + 12 = 26 4 + 4 = 8   4 + 6 = 10 44  
 
Sign of Chairperson BoS, Psychology 
Name of Chairperson BoS, 
Psychology: Dr. Vivek Belhekar 
Name of the Faculty: Humanities 
 
Sign Dean 
Name of Dean: Dr. Anil Singh 
Name of the Faculty: Humanities 
 

Page 13 of 84 
 
Syllabus: MA Psychology  
 
Semester I (3277761)  Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22  
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Code: 501 11: Course 1 Credits 4 Personality Psychology 
Code: 502 11: Course 2 Credits 4 Psychology of Cognition and Emotion 
Code: 503 11: Course 3 Credits 4 Statistics for Psychology 
Code: 504 11: Course 4 Credits 2 Experimental Psychology Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Code: 505 11: Psychopathology Across Lifespan 
OR 
Code: 505 12: Counselling Across Lifespan 
OR 
Code: 505 13: Organizational Behaviour 
OR 
Code: 505 14: Community and Social Psychology 
 
Research Methodology (Credits 4) 
 Code: 506 11: Research Methodology in Psychology 
 
Semester II (3277762)  Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22  
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Code: 511 11: Course 1 Credits 4 Evolutionary Psychology 
Code: 512 11: Course 2 Credits 4 Social Foundations of Human Behaviour 
Code: 513 11: Course 3 Credits 4 Positive Psychology 
Code: 514 11: Course 4 Credits 2 Psychological Testing and Psychometrics Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Code: 515 11: Psychodiagnostics 
OR 
Code: 515 12: Assessment in Counselling Psychology 
OR 
Code: 515 13: Competency Based Assessment  
OR 
Code: 515 14: Assessment in Social Psychology         
 
On the Job Training (OJT/FP) (Credits 4) 
Code: 516 11: On the Job training in Different Psychology related work sectors 
 
 
 
 9 
Semester III   Level 6.5  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Course 1: Intervention systems and Skills of Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Biological Basis of Human Behavior (4 cr) 
Course 3: Legal Perspectives in Psychology and Praxis (4 cr) 
Course 4: Data Analytics and Machine Learning applications to Psychology (2 cr) 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Practical Courses (PC) 
Course 1: Practicum in Clinical Psychology (PC) (4 cr) 
OR 
Course 2: Practicum in Counseling Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Course 3: Practicum in Industrial and Organizational Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Course 4: Practicum in Social Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Theoretical Courses (TH)  
Course 5: Political Psychology (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 6: Behavioral Economics (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 7: Advanced Skills and Processes for counseling and Psychotherapy (TH) (4 Cr) 
 
Research Project Course (Credits 4) 
Research Project in Psychology I: Preparing Research Proposal (4 Cr) 
 
Semester IV   Level 6.5  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 12) 
Course 1: Critical and Theoretical Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Human Resource Management (4 cr) 
Course 3: Cultural Psychology (4 cr) 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Theoretical Courses  
Course 1: Psychotherapy for Clinical Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 2: Career Counselling and World of Work (4 Cr) 
Course 3: Organizational Development (4 Cr) 
Course 4: Social Problems: Skills and Interventions (4 Cr) 
Course 5: Consumer Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 6: Psychology for Conservation and Climate Change (4 Cr) 
Course 7: Peace Psychology 
Course 8: CBT and REBT (4 Cr) 
 
Research Project Course (Credits 6) 
Research Project in Psychology II: Research Dissertation (6 Cr) 
 
 
Page 14 of 84 
 
 
 
 
Semester I 
  
Page 15 of 84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEM I: Mandatory Courses 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 16 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 501 11 
Course Name: PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives :  
1. Introducing theories of personality. 
2. Help learners to critically evaluate personality theory and research. 
3. Understand and apply assessment of personality. 
4. Understand applications of personality theory to various aspects of life.  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
Unit 1:  
CO1: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use research methods in personality 
psychology. They should be able to design study, critically evaluate earlier studies, and 
demonstrate understanding. 
CO2: Students are able to distinguish between classical and contemporary perspective in 
personality psychology and formulate an integrated understanding of them.  
Unit 2:  
CO3: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine trait theories of personality.  
CO4: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine person and situation debate, 
personality judgments, personality change in personality psychology.  
Unit 3:  
CO5: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine biological domain in personality 
psychology. 
CO6: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine cognitive-behavioral domain in 
personality psychology. 
Unit 4:  
CO7: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine Social-cultural influences on 
personality. 
CO8: Students are able to apply personality psychology to aspects of Business, Relationship, 
and Mental and Physical Health. 
Page 17 of 84 
 
 
Unit 1. Science of Personality: Methods, Assessment and Historical Approaches 
 a. Study of the Person: Personality Research Methods 
 b .  P e r s o n a l i t y  A s s e s s m e n t :  E f f e c t - s i z e ,  R e p l i c a b i lity, and Open-science 
c. Psychoanalytic aspects of personality. Psychodynamic perspective: contemporary    
issues. Culture and Psychoanalysis.  
d. Motives and personality: basic concepts, big three motives, d. Humanistic tradition.  
 
Unit 2. Trait approach: How People Differ? 
a. Allport, R. B. Cattel, Eysenck’s three factor. 
b. Lexical Approach. Big-Five and Five‐Factor Model: theory, evidence and 
applications, circumplex approach, HEXACO, recent developments 
c. Person and Situation. Personality Judgments 
d. Measurement of trait and theoretical and measurement issues. Personality Stability. 
Personality development. Personality change:Personality dispositions over time.  
 
Unit 3. Biological domain and Cognitive-Behavioral domain  
a. Genetic and personality evolutionary approach to personality.  
b. Physiological approaches to personality. 
c. Behaviorist and learning aspects of personality. 
d. Cognitive and Cognitive-experiential aspects of personality.  
 
Unit 4. Social-cultural, Application  
a. Sex-gender, social interaction, and personality 
b. Culture and Personality 
c. Personality, Business, and Relationship 
d. Mental and Physical Health: Personality disorders, Stress, coping adjustment and 
health.  
 
Books for Study 
1. Funder, D. C. (2019). The personality puzzle. WW Norton. NY. 
2. Buss D. M. & Larsen R. J. (2009). Personality Psychology: Domains of Knowledge 
About Human Nature. NJ: McGraw‐Hill Humanities. 
Page 18 of 84 
 
3. Corr, P. J. & Gerald Matthews, G. (2009). The Cambridge Handbook of 
Personality Psychology. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.  
Books for Reference 
1. Brody, N., & Ehrlichman, H. (1998). Personality Psychology: Science of 
Individuality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
2. Burger, J. M. (2010). Personality. Wadsworth Publishing.  
3. Cervone, D., &Pervin, L. A. (2009). Personality: Theory and Research (11th ed.). 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.  
4. Chamorro-Premuzic, T., & Furnham, A. (2005). Personality and Intellectual 
Competence. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
5. Costa, P.T., &Widiger, T.A. (2002). Personality disorders and the five‐factor model 
of  
6. Dan P . McAdams D. P . (2008). The Person: An Introduction to the Science of 
Personality Psychology. Wiley.  
7. Friedman, H. S., &Schustack, M. W. (Eds.). (2008). The Personality Reader (2nd ed.). 
Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.  
8. Hall, C. S., Lindzey, G., Campbell, J. B. (2007). Theories of Personality. ND: J. 
Wiley.  
9. Haslam, N. (2007). Introduction to Personality and Intelligence. London: Sage 
Publications.  
10. Hogan R. &. John W.H.(Eds.) (1985), Perspectives in Personality. Greenwich: JAI 
Press. 
11. Hogan, R. Johnson, J. Briggs S. (Eds.) (1997). Handbook of Personality Psychology. 
San Diego: Academic Press.  
12. John, O.P., Robins, R.W., &Pervin, LA. (Eds.) (2010). Handbook of Personality 
Theory and Research (3rded). New York, NY: Guilford.  
13. Larsen, R. J. (2010). Clashing Views in Personality Psychology. 
Dushkin/mcgraw‐hill.  
14. Mayer, J. & Mayer J. D. (2006). Readings in Personality Psychology. Allyn& Bacon.  
15. McCrae, R. R., & Costa, Jr., P. T. (2002). Personality in Adulthood: A Five-Factor 
Theory  Perspective (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Publications.  
16. McCrae, R.R. &Allik J. (Eds). (2002), The Five‐Factor model of Personality across 
cultures. N.Y.: Kluwer Academic Publisher. 
Page 19 of 84 
 
17. Miserandino, M. (2011). Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings. Pearson 
Education.  
18. Mroczek, D. K., & Little, T. D. (Eds.). (2006). Handbook of Personality Development 
.Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates  
personality (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  
19. Pervin, L. A. (2002) Science of Personality (2nded.). USA: Oxford University Press.  
20. Plutchik, R., & Conte, H. R. (Eds.). (1997). Circumplex Models of Personality and 
Emotions. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  
21. Roberts, B.W., & Hogan R. (2001). Personality Psychology in the Workplace. 
Washington: American Psychological Association.  
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• One test of descriptive types OR Reflection papers: 20 marks 
• Essay on one of the topic randomly assigned  OR Reflection papers: 20 marks  
• One presentation/ Review Submission/ Project Submission: 10 marks 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question.Questionscould combine more 
than one unit 
Page 20 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 501211 
Course Name: PSYCHOLOGY OF COGNITION AND EMOTION 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
A. Course Objectives:  
• Understanding advanced topics of cognitive science 
• Understanding the neuropsychological underpinnings of cognitive processes 
• Applying cognitive psychology knowledge to real-life problems. 
• Understanding theories, biological basis, and development of human emotions  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
Unit 1:  
CO1: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use research methods in cognitive 
psychology. They should be able to design study, critically evaluate earlier studies, and 
demonstrate understanding. 
CO2: Students are able to demonstrate understanding of basic cognitive processes and 
neuropsychological basis in cognitive psychology and formulate an integrated understanding 
of them.  
Unit 2:  
CO3: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine memory processes and neurological 
basis in cognitive psychology.  
CO4: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine language processes, neurological 
basis and language in the context in cognitive psychology.  
Unit 3:  
CO5: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine human intelligence and cognitive 
development. 
CO6: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine problem solving, creativity and 
thinking. 
Unit 4:  
CO7: Students are able to explain, evaluate, examine, and apply theories of emotions and 
biological basis of emotions. 
CO8: Students are able to explain, evaluate, examine, and apply measurement of emotions. 
  
Page 21 of 84 
 
 
Unit 1: Cognitive Neuroscience, Attention and Perception 
A. Cognitive Neuroscience: Neuronal Structure and Function; Intelligence and 
Neuroscience; Methods of cognitive neuroscience 
B. Visual Perception: Visual Object Recognition, Face perception 
C. Attention and Consciousness: Attention Processes, Theories of Attention, 
Consciousness of Mental Processes; Preconscious Processing  
D. Neuropsychological basis of Attention and Visual Perception 
Unit 2. Memory and Language 
A. Memory: Models and Research Methods; Metacognition. 
B. Memory Processes; Mental Images, Maps, and Propositions. 
C. Language and language in context 
D.  Neuropsychological basis of Memory and language 
Unit 3. Thinking and Intelligence 
A. Problem Solving and Creativity 
B. Thinking, Decision Making and Reasoning. Neuropsychological basis of executive 
functions. 
C. Human Intelligence. Organization of Knowledge in the Mind 
D. Cognitive development: Piaget, Socio-Cultural, RR, Modularity of Mind.  
 
 
Unit 4. Psychology of Emotions 
A. Theories of Emotions: Theories of emotions 
B. Biological basis of human emotions 
C. Measurement of Emotions 
D. Emotional Development and regulation 
 
Books for Reading  
1. Sternberg, R. J.; Sternberg, K, Mio, J. (2012). Cognitive Psychology. Wadsworth: 
Belmont, CA.  
2. Matlin, M. W. (2009). Cognition. John Wiley & Sons: NJ.  
3. Bly, B.M. &Rumelhart, D. E. (1999). Cognitive Science. Academic Press: San Diego.  
4. Lewis, M., Haviland-Jones, J. M., & Barrett, L. F. (Eds.). (2010). Handbook Of 
emotions (3rd edition). New York, NY: Guilford.  
Page 22 of 84 
 
5. Dalgleish, T. & Power, MJ. (2000). Handbook of Cognition and Emotion. John 
Wiley: Sussex.  
6. Zilmer, E. A. & Spears, M. V. (2001). Principals of neuropsychology. Canada: 
Wadsworth. 
List of Reference  
1. Anderson, V., Jacobs, R. & Anderson, P. (2008). Executive Functions and the Frontal 
Lobes: A Lifespan Perspective. NY: Psychology Press.  
2. Baddeley, A. (1990). Human memory: Theory and practice. Boston: Allyn& Bacon.  
3. Beaumont, J. G., Kenealy, P. M., & Rogers, M. J. C. (Ed.). (1999). The Blackwell 
dictionary of neuropsychology. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.  
4. Berry, J. W., Poortinga, Y. H., Segal, M. H., &Dason, P. R. (2002). Cross-cultural 
psychology: Research and perspective. Cambridge: CUP.  
5. Carlson, N. (1999). Physiology of behaviour. Boston: Allyn& Bacon.  
6. Jurado, M. B. &Rosselli, M. (2007). The Elusive Nature of Executive Functions: A 
Review of our Current Understanding. Neuropsychol Rev, 17:213–233.  
7. Carruther, P. & Chamberlain, A. (Ed.). (2000). Evolution and the human mind: 
modularity, language and meta-cognition.  
8. Ekman, P. &Cordaro, D. (2011). What is meant by calling emotions basic. Emotion 
Review, 3, 364-370.  
9. Finger, S. (1994). Origin of neuroscience: A history of explorations into brain 
function. N.Y.:OUP.  
10. Franken, R. E. (2002). Human motivation. Australia: Wadsworth.  
11. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The New Cognitive Neurosciences, Second Edition. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.  
12. Green, D. W. (1996). Cognitive science: An introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.  
13. Johnson, M. H. (1997). Developmental cognitive neuroscience. Blackwell Publishers.  
14. Kellogg, R. T. (1997). Cognitive psychology. London: Sage.  
15. Kolb B., &Whishaw I.Q. (2007). Fundamentals of human neuropsychology (6th ed). 
New York, NY: Worth Publishers.  
16. Lewis, M. &Haviland-Jones, J. M (Ed.). (2000). Handbook of emotions. NY: The 
Guilford  
17. Lezak, M. D. (1976). Neuropsychological assessment. NY: OUP.  
18. Mauss, I. B. & Robinson, M. D. (2009). Measures of emotion: A review. Cognition 
and Emotion, 23, 209-237.  
Page 23 of 84 
 
19. Mehu, M., Mortillaro, M., Banziger, T., & Scherer, K. R. (2012). Reliable facial 
muscle activation enhances recognizability and credibility of emotional expression. 
Emotion, 12,701 715.  
20. Nelson, T. O. (1992). Metacognition: Core readings. Boston: Allyn& Bacon.  
21. Press.  
22. Simon-Thomas, E. R., Keltner, D. J., Sauter, D., Sinicropi-Yao, L., & Abramson, A. 
(2009).  
23. The voice conveys specific emotions: Evidence from vocal burst displays. Emotion, 9, 
838-846.  
24. Walsh, K. (1994). Neuropsychology: A clinical approach. N.D.: Churchill Livingston  
Evaluation: 
Internal Evaluation: 50 marks 
40 marks: Two Class Tests for 20 marks each 
10 marks: Submission/ Project submission.  
 
 
 
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
  
Page 24 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 503 11 
Course Name: STATISTICS FOR PSYCHOLOGY 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. To introduce fundamental concepts about statistical application to psychology 
2. To help learners to understand applications of statistics and learn numerical methods 
associated with them 
3. To introduce multivariate methods and computer applications to statistics 
4. Learning to use R for data analysis.  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
Unit 1:  
CO1: Students are able to articulate, apply preliminary concepts in statistics like probability, 
inference, and descriptive statistics. They should be able to do calculations, numerical, 
proofs, R codes, and critically evaluate methods and demonstrate understanding. 
CO2: Students are able to demonstrate understanding of R software, data visualization, 
statistical applications.  
Unit 2:  
CO3: Students are able to articulate, apply parametric inferential statistics like t-test, 
ANOVA, MANOVA, etc. They should be able to do calculations, numerical, proofs, R 
codes, and critically evaluate methods and demonstrate understanding. 
CO4: Students are able to articulate, apply non parametric inferential statistics like Wilcoxon 
sign-rank test; median test; U test; Kruskal-Wallis test, etc. They should be able to do 
calculations, numerical, proofs, R codes, and critically evaluate methods and demonstrate 
understanding. 
Unit 3:  
CO5: Students are able to articulate, apply parametric inferential statistics like product 
moment, partial correlation, special correlations, linear regression, mediation and moderation 
analysis, logistic regression, etc. They should be able to do calculations, numerical, proofs, R 
codes, and critically evaluate methods and demonstrate understanding. 
CO6: Students are able to articulate, apply non parametric inferential statistics like Kendall's 
tau; chi square, binomial test, proportions test, etc. They should be able to do calculations, 
numerical, proofs, R codes, and critically evaluate methods and demonstrate understanding. 
Unit 4:  
CO7: Students are able to articulate, apply factor analytic techniques of exploratory and 
confirmatory factor analysis, etc. They should be able to do calculations, numerical, proofs, R 
codes, and critically evaluate methods and demonstrate understanding. 
Page 25 of 84 
 
CO8: Students are able to articulate, apply structural equations modelling, multilevel linear 
modelling, multiway frequency analysis, etc. They should be able to do calculations, 
numerical, proofs, R codes, and critically evaluate methods and demonstrate understanding. 
 
 
Unit 1. Preliminary concepts and R 
A. Probability: axioms, random variables, expected value, central limit theorem 
Distributions: discrete distributions- binomial, poison; continues distributions: 
normal, t, F, chi-square, jointly distributed random variables. 
B. Inference: estimation theory, properties of estimators, statistical hypothesis testing, 
typesoferrors. 
C. Descriptive statistics: central tendency and variability, power and effect size. Data 
Visualization.  
D. R: R interface; syntax; importing and exporting data; data management. Descriptive; 
graphs; basic and multivariate statistics in R; R GUI, other software. 
 
Unit 2. Inferential statistics: inference about location 
A. Two group differences: t test- independent and dependent samples. R codes 
B. Multi-group differences: one-way ANOV A: independent and dependent samples. two-
wayANOV A: independent samples. ANCOV A. R codes 
C. Wilcoxon sign-rank test; median test; U test; Kruskal-Wallis test. R codes 
D. MANOV A and R codes 
 
 
Unit 3. Association, Prediction and Other Methods 
A. Correlation: product moment, partial correlation, special correlations. R codes 
B. Linear regression (OLS). R codes 
C. Nonparametric correlations: Kendall's tau; other measures, chi square,binomial test, 
proportions test. R codes.  
D. Multiple regression. Moderation and Mediation analysis.Logistic regression. R codes. 
 
Unit 4. Factor Analysis, SEM, and Other Multivariate Techniques 
A. Factor analysis: basic concepts, methods of extraction and methods of rotation 
B. Confirmatory Factor Analysis 
C. Structural Equations Modelling  
Page 26 of 84 
 
D. Multilevel Linear Modelling. Multiway Frequency Analysis.  
 
Note for paper setters: It is recommended that small values for computation be given and 
that of log, square and square root and statistical tables be given for use. Use of simple 
calculators is allowed in exams. The problems for full numerical to be set using the raw data 
methods (ungrouped data) in the examination. The formula sheet be provided along with the 
question paper. Partial numerical are permitted on multivariate methods, that can be 
calculated with simple calculators (E.g., DO NOT set numerical like DO MANOVA OF 
GIVEN DATA). R code can be asked in the examination.  
 
Books for Study: 
1. Aron & Aron (2008). Statistics for Psychology (5th ed). New Delhi: Pearson  
2. Howell, D. (2009).Statistical Methods for Psychology (7th ed.). Wadsworth. 
3. Belhekar, V.M. (2016). Statistics for Psychology using R. Sage publication: ND. 
4. Minium, E. W., King, B. M., & Bear, G. (2001). Statistical reasoning in psychology and 
education. Singapore: John-Wiley. 
5. Wilcox R. R. (2009). Basic Statistics: Understanding Conventional Methods and Modern 
Insights. NY: OUP. 
6. Navarro, D.(2019).Learning statistics with R: A tutorial for psychology students and other 
beginners. (Version 0.6.1). https://learningstatisticswithr.com/book/ 
Books for Reference: 
1. Daniel, W. W. (1995). Biostatistics. (6th Ed.). N.Y.: John Wiely. 
2. Field, A., Miles, J., and Field, Z. (2012). Discovering Statistics Using R. NY: Sage. 
3. Gourch, R. L. (1983). Factor Analysis. Lorrence Erlbaum 
4. Guilford, J. P., &Fructore, B. (1978). Fundamental statistics for psychology and 
education.N.Y.: McGraw-Hill. 
5. Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1998). Mulivariate data 
analysis.(5th Ed.). N.J.: Prentice-Hall Inc. 
6. Hatekar, N. R. (2009). Principles of Econometrics: An Introduction (Using R). ND: Sage. 
7. Loehlin, J. (1998). Latent Variable Models: an introduction to factor, path, and 
structuralanalysis. Hillsdale, N.J.: LEA. 
8. Marcoulides, A. G. &Schumacker, E. R. (2001). New developments and techniques 
instructural equation modeling. Hilsdel, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Page 27 of 84 
 
9. R Development Core Team. (2011). R: A Language and Environment for 
StatisticalComputing. Vienna, Austria:R Foundation for Statistical Computing. 
(http://www.R-project.org) 
10. Sheskin, D. (2011).Handbook of Parametric and Nonparametric Statistical Procedures, 
(5thed). Chapman and Hall/CRC. 
11. Tabachnick, B. G. &Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics (4th Ed.). Boston: 
Allynand Bacon. 
12. Wilcox, R. R. (1996). Statistics for social sciences. San Diego: Academic Press. 
13. Wilcox, R. R. (2011). Modern Statistics for the Social and Behavioral Sciences: A 
PracticalIntroduction. CRC Press.  
Evaluation: 
Internal Evaluation: 50 marks 
40 marks: Four Class Test for Statistics for 10 marks each.  
10 marks: Data analysis submission based on R.  
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
 
  
Page 28 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 504 11 
Course Name: EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY PRACTICAL 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: I   L e v e l :  6 . 0  
Credit: 02   H o u r s :  12 hrs per week per batch 
One batch = 8 students  
  
Course Objectives:  
1. To enable learners to design experiments in various areas of psychology 
2. To help learners to design appropriate computer programs for the experiments  
3. To enable learners to analyze and report the data of experiments  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1: Students are able to conceptualize the experimental problem from a psychological 
theory. 
CO2: Students should be able to convert theory into testable hypothesis and design an 
experiment.  
CO3: Students are able to demonstrate coding ability to convert an designed experiment in 
experiment builder (e.g., openseasame) software. 
CO4: Students are able to obtain research participants following sample selection process and 
conduct the experiment.  
CO5. They should be able to do calculations, numerical, R codes, of the individual and group 
data and demonstrate understanding. 
CO6: Students are able to apply appropriate parametric and non-parametric inferential 
statistics.  
CO7: Students are able to write reports for the experiments.  
CO8: Students are able to work in a group to on the experiments designed by their peers.  
 
 
Six experiments to be designed in cognitive processes, personality, motivation and emotion 
from the areas given below: 
a) Sensation, attention and perception, b) Memory, c) Reasoning, d) Decision making, e) 
Problem solving, f) Learning, g) Imagery, h) Motivation, i) Emotion, j) Personality, k) 
Thinking, l) Language.  
UNIT 1: Experimental designing: Students will be divided into six groups. Each group has 
to choose an area by consensus or majority. Each student will have to design an experiment 
pertaining to the area chosen by the group. The student will present the experiment in the 
Page 29 of 84 
 
class. From these experiments, one experiment is selected as groups experiment. In this way, 
six experiments are obtained. A student can also design additional experiments in the areas 
other than the groups’ area and present them along with presentations of respective areas. Six 
presentations and twelve supervision sessions are required for this. (1 credit).  
UNIT 2: Experimental Computerizing: All students have to learn one open-source package 
for computerizing experiment (for example, PEBL, Open Sesame, etc.). This may be done by 
workshop by the teacher/students about the computerization. The individual experiment 
designed by each student has to be computerized and presented in a CD (and Email if needed) 
for internal assessment. The printout of the program syntax AND/OR major steps in 
computer programming also need to submitted along with this assignment. (1 credit).  
UNIT 3: Experiments Conduction: These select six experiments (Unit 1) will then be 
conducted in the laboratory. If the facilities permit, these experiments can be carried out 
using the computer interface. (1 credits). 
UNIT 4: Experimental Data Analysis and Report: The data obtained is analyzed by using 
software packages (e.g. R) and reported in a typed report. The report also needs to be 
submitted in a softcopy. (1 credit)  
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• Self-designed experiment (content and method) and Computerization of the 
experiment and its report (Soft and hard copy): 20 marks 
• Experimental Journal: Journal contains (i) report of 6 experiments conducted; (ii) a 
type‐written report to be submitted on a review of literature on one of the topics above 
covering research of last five years: 20 marks  
• Internal Viva: Internal viva by Mentor: 10 marks  
Semester end Practical examination: 50 marks.  
• Viva-voce examination: 35 marks 
• Instruction and Conduction: 05 marks 
• Report: 10 marks  
  
Page 30 of 84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEM I: Elective Courses 
 
Page 31 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 505 11 
Course Name: Psychopathology across lifespan 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives:  
1. To inform students diverse aetiologies of clinical disorders. 
2. To understand clinical presentations and phenomenology of clinical disorders.  
3. To learn about the symptom and criteria of clinical disorders 
4. To Classify symptoms and clinical presentation to reach diagnosis.  
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
Unit 1:  
CO1: Students are able to articulate, apply, and use classification of mental disorders.  
CO2: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine and apply Phenomenology, signs 
and symptoms of clinical psychopathology   
Unit 2:  
CO3: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine signs and symptoms, diagnostics 
criterion, clinical picture, etiology of Schizophrenia spectrum, and Mood disorders.  
CO4: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine signs and symptoms, diagnostics 
criterion, clinical picture, etiology of Neurocognitive disorders, and Substance use and 
addictive disorders.  
Unit 3:  
CO5: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine signs and symptoms, diagnostics 
criterion, clinical picture, etiology of Anxiety Disorders, OCD, Trauma and stressors related 
disorders, Dissociative, psychosomatic disorders, Personality Disorders, Habit and impulse 
disorders.  
CO6: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine signs and symptoms, diagnostics 
criterion, clinical picture, etiology of Sexual dysfunctions and gender Dysphoria, eating and 
sleep disorders, and Intellectual deficits and Learning Disability. 
Unit 4:  
CO7: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine signs and symptoms, diagnostics 
criterion, clinical picture, etiology of disorders among Children, Adolescence .  
CO8: Students are able to explain, evaluate, and examine signs and symptoms, diagnostics 
criterion, clinical picture, etiology of disorders among Geriatric population.  
 
Unit I Orientation, Overview and Introduction to clinical psychology  
A. History of mental illness in India, Mental Health Acts and legal systems.  
B. Classifications of mental disorders: DSM and ICD.  
C. Phenomenology, signs and symptoms of clinical psychopathology.  
Page 32 of 84 
 
D. Socio-demographic determinants of clinical psychopathology.  
Unit II Psychopathology of psychosis, mood, brain and addiction  
A. Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.  
B. Mood disorders.  
C. Neurocognitive disorders.  
D. Substance use and addictive disorders.  
Unit III Psychopathology of Anxiety spectrum, Personality, Sexual dysfunction, 
Intellectual deficits and Learning.  
A. Anxiety Disorders, OCD, Trauma and stressors related disorders, Dissociative, 
psychosomatic disorders.  
B. Personality Disorders, Habit and impulse disorders.  
C. Sexual dysfunctions and gender Dysphoria, eating and sleep disorders.  
D. Intellectual deficits and Learning Disability.  
 
 
 
Unit IV Clinical Psychopathology for Children, Adolescence and Geriatric population  
A. Specific developmental disorders of speech and language, scholastic skills, motor 
function, Pervasive developmental disorders, Hyperkinetic disorders, Disruptive and 
Conduct disorders.  
B. Emotional disorders with onset specific to childhood, Disorders of social functioning 
with onset specific to childhood and adolescence, Tic disorders, other behavioral and 
emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood and adolescence.  
C. Suicide and related behaviors.  
D. Geriatric psychopathology.  
Books for study  
1. Adams P.B. and Sutker, H.E. (2015). Comprehensive Handbook of Psychopathology 
(3rd ed.). NY: Springer. 
2. Hersen, M and Beidel, D (2012). Adult psychopathology and diagnosis (6th ed.). NY: 
Wiley. 
3. Sadock B.J. and Sadock V.A.(2015). Kaplan and Sadock’s Synopsis of Psychiatry 
(11th ed).. PA: Lipincott, Williams and Wilkins.  
4. M.Gelder, D. Gath, R.Mayou, P. Cowen. (1996). Oxford textbook of Psychiatry (3 
edition). UK: Oxford University Press.  
Page 33 of 84 
 
Books for reference  
1. Millon, T. Blaney, P. and Davis R.D. (1999). Oxford textbook of psychopathology. 
UK: Oxford University Press.  
2. Millon, T., Krueger, R.F., Simonsen, E. (2011). Contemporary Directions in 
Psychopathology. NY: Guilford Press.  
3. Craighead, W.E. Miklowitz, D.J. and Craighead L.W. (2008). Psychopathology: 
History, Diagnosis and Empirical Foundations. NY: John Wiley and Sons.  
4. Maddux, J.E. and Winstead, B.A. (2007). Psychopathology: Foundations for a 
contemporary understanding. NY: CRC press.  
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• One test of descriptive types within the semester: 20 marks each 
• Clinical Presentation and Classification/symptoms of 10 clinical disorders (one time 
OR distributed over time): 20 marks  
• Viva with role play on clients clinical presentation: 10 marks 
Semester-End Examination: 50 marks  
• Paper Pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question. Questions could combine 
more than one unit. 
  
Page 34 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 505 12 
Course Name: Counselling Across the Lifespan 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives :  
1. To understand academic, emotional, behavioural difficulties of children and 
adolescents. 
2. To acquaint students with counselling needs in marriage, workplace and among 
elderly. 
3. To highlight counselling for people with addiction issues, attempted suicide, 
disabilities and trauma.  
4. To introduce students to the mental health issues experienced in Adolescence and 
Adulthood. 
 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1:Students will be well acquainted with different areas of counselling and related goals 
and processes of working with clients in these different areas. 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate their understanding of core issues related to 
different age groups and special areas, helping them arrive at better case conceptualizations. 
CO3: Students will be able to critically examine counselling theories, skills and competencies 
in these different areas of counselling psychology 
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge and competency while working with 
counselling clients. 
 
Unit 1. Children and Adolescents 
a. Slow learners and talented/ exceptional  
b. Children with learning disability and ADHD  
c. Emotional, behavioural issues, conduct disorders, developmental disorders.  
d.  Children with socially disadvantaged background and under achievers  
Unit 2. Counselling Adults and the Elderly 
Page 35 of 84 
 
a. Premarital and marital counselling: role conflict, sex and sexuality issues and 
relationship enrichment skills. 
b. Workplace and employee counselling 
c. Elderly: Pre-retirement and retirement counselling  
d. Adjustment to Aging: Coping with loss of spouse and changes in family structure, 
health related issues, enhancing quality of life. 
Unit 3. Counselling for Specific Mental Health Issues 
a. Anxiety and Depression  
b. Suicide prevention and management. 
c. Trauma and sexual abuse counseling 
d. Personality Disorders: A precursor to understand several issues in adulthood 
 
Unit 4. Counselling Special Groups 
a. Special issues faced by women and feminist approach to counseling. 
b. Special issues faced by LGBTQIA+ and Queer Affirmative Counselling 
c. Rehabilitation counselling for persons with physical, sensory and intellectual disabilities: 
vocational and psychosocial aspects. 
d. Rehabilitation counselling for Drug addicts and alcoholics. 
Books for study 
1. Bor, R., Jo Bbner-Landy, Gilli, S., Brace,C. (2002). Counselling in Schools. Sage 
Publications Ltd 
2. Wong, D. W., Hall, K. R., & Hernandez, L. W. (2020). Counseling individuals through 
the lifespan. SAGE publications. 
3. Clough, P; Pardeck, J., Yuen, F.(eds) (2005). Handbook of Emotional and Behavioural 
difficulties. New Delhi, Sage Publications. 
4. Geldard, K and Geldard, D (2004). Counselling Adolescents. Sage Publications, New 
Delhi 
5. Gothard, B., Mignot, P., Offer, M., & Ruff. M. (2001).Career Guidance in Context. Sage. 
6. King B.M. (1996) Human Sexuality Today (2nd ed.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 
7. Niles, S. & Harris-Bowlsbey, J. (2013). Career development interventions in the 
21stcentury (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education 
8. O’Leary, C.J (1999). Counselling Couples and Families. Sage Publications, New Delhi 
9. Ponte Otto, D.B. Casas, J.M; Suzuki, L.A. And Alexander, C.M. (eds) .(2001). Handbook 
of Multicultural Counselling. Sage Publications, New Delhi 
Page 36 of 84 
 
10. Rivers, P.C (1994) Alcoholic and Human Behaviour: Theory Research and Practice. 
New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
11. Sherry, J. (2004).Counselling Children, Adolescents and Families. Sage Publications, 
New Delhi 
12. Velleman, R. (2001). Counselling for Alcoholic Problems. New Delhi:Sage 
Publications,. 
13. Wolfe, R. Dryden, W. and Star bridge, S. (eds) (2003). Handbook of Counselling 
Psychology. Sage Publications. 
14. Herr, E.L., and Cramer, S.H. (2003).Career guidance and counselling through the life 
span: Systematic approaches (6thed.) Boston: Allynand Bacon. 
15. Wright, B.A. (1983). Physical disability: A psychosocial approach (2nd ed.). New 
York, NY: Harper & Row. 
16. Kapur, M. (2011). Counselling Children with Psychological Problems. Delhi: Pearson 
17. Matthys, W. &Lochman, J.E. (2010). Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Conduct 
Disorder in Children. Wilyey- Blackwell. 
18. Kober, R. Enhancing the quality of life of people with intellectual disabilities: Theory 
and Practice (Ed.). New York: Springer. 
Books for Reference: 
1. Carroll, M. (1996). Workplace Counselling A Systematic Approach to Employee Care. 
New Delhi: Sage Publications. 
2. Casey, J. A. (1995). Developmental issues for school counselors using technology. 
Elementary School Guidance &Counseling, 30, 26-35. 
3. Garland, D. S., (1983). Working with couples for marriage enrichment. SanFrancisco, CA: 
Jossey- Bass. 
4. Halford, W.K., Markman, H.J., Stanley, S., Kline, G.H., (2002). Relationship 
enhancement. In Douglas H. Sprenkle (Ed.), Effectiveness research in marriage and 
family therapy (pp. 191-222). Alexandria, VA: American Association for Marriage and 
Family Therapy 
5. Nelson-Jones, R. (1996). Relating skills: A practical guide to effective personal 
relationships. Trowbridge, Wiltshire, Great Britian: Redwood Books 
6. Norton,K and Mcgauley, G (1998). Counselling Difficult clients. Sage Publications, New 
Delhi. 
7. Sen, A.K. (1982). Mental Retardation. ,Bhelpur: Kripa Psychology Center. 
Page 37 of 84 
 
8. Midgley, N., Hayes, J., Cooper, M. (2017). Essential research findings in child and 
adolescent counselling and psychotherapy (Eds.). New Delhi: Sage. 
 
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks  
Case Analysis: 15 marks 
Essay: 15 marks 
One Written test: 20 marks each 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question that could combine more than 
one unit. 
 
  
Page 38 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 505 13 
Course Name: Organizational Behaviour (OB) 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives:  
• To understand the concepts, nature and principles of Organizational Behaviour and 
Positive Psychology at Work.  
• To introduce applied behavioural science principles and practices into the ongoing 
organization towards the goal of improving organizational effectiveness.  
• To develop an understanding of Motivation, Leadership, and Organizational Culture 
and to become an Organizational Behaviour Practitioner. 
• To grasp an understanding of basic organizational behaviour. 
 
Course Outcome (CO): 
CO 1: Students will acquire a basic understanding about the field of Organizational 
Behaviour and the research methods in the field. 
CO 2: Students will be able to comprehend the various aspects of organizational 
behaviour at the individual level. 
CO 3: Students will acquire the knowledge of group dynamics in organizations. 
CO 4: Students will be able to demonstrate an understanding of positive 
organizational behaviour and the interventions using a positive approach. 
 
Unit-1: Introduction: Concepts, Nature and Principles of Organizational Behaviour 
a. Organizational behaviour: scope and processes; Management Functions, Roles and 
Skills; Effective v/s Successful Managerial Activities  
b. Changing Context: Changing context of organizations; changing profiles of 
employees and customers; Globalization; Information Technology; Diversity; Social 
Responsibility and Ethics. 
c. Disciplines that contribute to OB field; challenges and opportunities for OB; 
foundations of individual behaviour;Research Methods in Organizational Behaviour 
Page 39 of 84 
 
d. Positive Psychology at Work, Positive Organizational Scholarship (POS) and 
Psychological Capital (PsyCap). 
Unit-2: The Individual 
a. Individual Differences: Personality, Attitudes, Abilities, and Emotions 
b. Perception and Individual Decision Making 
c. Motivation: From Concepts to Applications 
d. Coping with Frustration, Stress, and Burnout  
 
Unit-3: The Group 
a. Foundations of Group Behaviour and Understanding Work Teams. 
b. Communication. 
c. Leadership & leading Virtually; Power and Politics. 
d. Conflict and Negotiations. 
Unit-4: Positive Organizational Behaviour  
a. Categories of Positive Approach: Internality, self-management, optimism, trust, 
collaboration 
b. Positive thinking: Mindfulness, creativity, techniques for creative thinking, extension 
motivation 
c. Humour and Innovation at the workplace 
d. Interventions with Positive Approach: Future Search, Appreciative Inquiry, Positive 
Reinforcement (Pareek, 4th ed.) 
Books for Study  
1. Bell, S.B., McAlpine, K.L and Hill, S.N (2023) Leading Virtually. Annual Review 
ofOrganizational Psychology and Organizational Behaviour, 10, 339-362. 
2. Pareek, U. & Khanna, S. (2016). Understanding Organizational Behaviour (4th ed.). 
OxfordUniversity Press 
3. Robbins, S.P , and Judge, T.A and V ohra, N (2022). Organizational Behaviour, 18th 
Edition.Pearson 
4. Kreitner, R and Kinicki, A. (2008) Organizational Behaviour, Tenth Edition, Tata 
McGraw Hill Publishing Company, Limited, New Delhi, India 
5. Luthans, F. (2011) Organizational Behaviour: An Evidenced based approach. 
ThirteenthEdition. McGraw – Hill Edition 
6. Nelson, D.L. & Cooper, C.L. (2007).Positive Organizational Behaviour. Sage 
Publications New Delhi 
Page 40 of 84 
 
7. Schultz, D and Schultz, S.E (2006).Psychology and Work Today. Pearson Education 
Inc. Tenth Edition, New Jersey, USA.  
Books for Reference  
1. Anderson, N, Ones, D.S, Sinangil, H.K and Viswesvarana, C (Editors) 
(2005).Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. V ol 1 Personnel 
Psychology. Sage Publications, New Delhi.  
2. Ashkanasy, N.M; Wilderom, C.P . M and Peterson, M.F Editors (2000) Handbook of 
Organizational Culture and Climate. Sage Publications, New Delhi.  
3. Butler, M and Rose, E (2011) Introduction to Organisational Behaviour. Jaico 
Publishing House, Mumbai.  
4. Clegg, S., Korberger, M and Pitsis, T (2012) Managing and Organizations: An 
Introduction to Theory and Practice. Sage Publications, New Delhi.  
5. Cooper, C.L (2011) Organizational Health and Wellbeing. V ol 1, 2, 3. Sage 
Publications, New Delhi  
6. Greenberg, J and Baron, R.A (2009) Behaviour in Organizations. Ninth Editions. 
Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limited, New Delhi.  
7. Janasz, S.C. de., Dowd, K.O and Schneider, B.Z (2012) Interpersonal Skills in 
Organizations. 3rd edition. Tata‐ McGraw Hill edition. New Delhi  
8. Kreitner, R, Kinicki, A and Buelens, M (1999) Organizational Behaviour. McGraw 
Hill Publishing Co. England  
9. McShane, S.L, Glinow, MA V and Sharma, R.R (2011) Organizational Behaviour. 5th 
Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, New Delhi.  
10. Lamberton, L.H and Minor, L (2012) Human Relations: Strategies for Success. 4th 
Edition. Tata McGraw Hill Education Pvt Ltd, New Delhi.  
11. Landy, F.J and Conte, J. M (2004) Work in the 21st Century: An Introduction to 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, McGraw Hill. New Y ork. USA  
12. Lewis, Sarah (2011) Positive Psychology at Work. Wiley Blackwell, United Kingdom  
13. Luthans, F (2008) Organizational Behaviour. Eleventh Edition. McGraw Hill 
International Edition, New Y ork.  
14. Mamoria, C.B and Rao, V .S.P (2012) Personnel Management. Thirtieth Edition. 
Himalaya Publishing House, New Delhi.  
15. Pauchant, T. C (2002) Ethics and Spirituality at Work. Quorum Books London  
16. Robbins, S.P ., Judge, T.A., and Sanghi, S (2009) Organizational Behaviour, 13th 
Edition, Pearson Prentice Hall, New Delhi, India.  
Page 41 of 84 
 
17. Schermerhorn, J.R Jr., Hunt, J.G, Osborn, R.N (2001) Organizational behaviour, 
Seventh Edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc New Y ork  
18. Shani, A.B., Chandler, D,. Coget, H.F and Law, J.B (2009) Behaviour in 
Organizations. An Experiential Approach. Ninth Edition. McGraw‐Hill Irwin, New 
Yo r k ,  U S A .   
19. Sinha, J.B.P (2008) Culture and Organizational Behaviour. Sage Publications, New 
Delhi, India.  
 
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks  
Case Analysis: 15 marks 
Essay: 15 marks 
One Written test: 20 marks each 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question that could combine more than 
one unit. 
  
Page 42 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 505 14 
Course Name: Community and Social Psychology 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
Course Objectives:  
1. To understand the history and basic concepts of community psychology  
2. To develop an understanding of community life and human diversity in context  
3. To acquire the knowledge of community-based interventions strategies 
4. To appreciate the role of psychology in the process of social change and social justice 
 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Students will be well acquainted with the nature and scope of community psychology 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate their understanding of communities  
CO3: Students will be able to critically analyze human diversity in context 
CO4: Students will be able to apply their knowledge towards achieving social change  
 
Unit 1. Introducing community psychology 
a. What’s community psychology?  
b. Challenging psychology over its neglect of the social 
c. Core values/principles in community psychology 
d. History and theory of community psychology in India 
 
Unit 2. Understanding communities 
a. Appreciating individuals within environments 
b. Understanding communities  
c. Understanding human diversity in context 
d. Ecological levels of analysis in community psychology 
 
Unit 3. Community research 
a. Values and assumptions at work  
b. Three philosophies of science for community research  
c. Cultural and social context of research  
d. Challenges of community-participation in research    
 
Unit 4. Interventions and social change 
a. Focus on prevention and promotion  
b. Community intervention strategies for social change 
c. Community psychologist: A professional and a pioneer for change 
d. Community psychology: Future outlook  
Page 43 of 84 
 
 
Books for study  
Kloos, B., Hill, J., Thomas, E., Wandersman, A., Elias, M. J., & Dalton, J. H. (2012). 
Community Psychology. Belmont, CA: Cengage Learning. 
Reich, S., Riemer, M., Prilleltensky, I., & Montero, M. (2007). International community 
psychology. New York: Springer Science+ Business Media, LLC. 
Orford, J. (2008). Community psychology: Challenges, controversies and emerging 
consensus. London: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
Moritsugu, J., Vera, E., Wong, F. Y., & Duffy, K. G. (2015). Community psychology. New 
York: Psychology Press. 
Books for reference 
Rappaport, J., & Seidman, E. (Eds.). (2000). Handbook of community psychology. Springer 
Science & Business Media. 
Nelson, G., &Prilleltensky, I. (2005). Community psychology: In pursuit of liberation and 
well-being. UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 Five topics shall be displayed in the beginning of the semester. Students shall write an 
essay on one of the topic in the classroom. The topics shall be announced : 20 marks 
 One test of descriptive type: 20 marks  
 One thematic paper/project/activity: 10 marks 
 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question that could combine more than 
one unit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 84 
 
 
 
Semester I: Research Methodology 
  
Page 45 of 84 
 
MA Psychology 
(Under NEP) 
Subject Code: 506 11 
Course Name: Research Methodology for Psychology 
Type of course: Research Methodology 
SEMESTER: I      L e v e l :  6.0 
Credit: 04      H o u r s :  60 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. To acquaint learners with methodology of quantitative and qualitative psychological 
research. 
2. To prepare students to appreciate different philosophical issues in psychological research 
3. To acquaint learners with philosophy, ethics, design, and evaluation of research in 
psychology. 
4. To enable learners to design various types of research. 
Course Outcomes (CO): 
CO1: Students will acquire the knowledge of philosophical foundations of research 
CO2: Students will be able to demonstrate the skill s of designing various experimental and 
non-experimental research 
CO3: Students will be able to critically appreciate  a n d  c o m p a r e  v a r i o u s  m e t h o d s  o f  d o i n g  
research 
CO4: Students will be able to apply such knowledge in solving real life issues 
 
Unit 1. Philosophy and Ethics of Psychological Research. 
a. Epistemological positions in psychological research : scientific realism, logical 
positivism; Ockham's razor; 
b. Popper and Kuhn’s contribution: theory dependence o f observation; understanding 
theory: components and connections – concepts, cons tructs, variables and hypothesis; 
Duhem–Quine thesis; Quine’s critique of empiricism 
c. Ethical standards of psychological research: planni ng, conduction and reporting 
research 
d. Proposing and reporting quantitative research 
 
Unit 2. Research Settings and Methods of Data Collection 
a. Observation and Interview method  
Page 46 of 84 
 
b. Questionnaire 
c. Survey research 
d. Other non-experimental methods 
 
 
Unit 3. Experimental and Quasi‐Experimental Methods 
a. Independent Groups Designs 
b. Repeated Measures Designs 
c. Complex Designs 
d. Quasi‐experimental Designs and Program Evaluation 
 
Unit 4. Qualitative research 
a. Philosophy and Conceptual foundations 
b. Interpretive Phenomenological Analysis; Discourse analysis 
c. Grounded Theory 
d. Narrative Analysis; Conversation analysis 
 
Books for study 
1. Shaughnessy, J. J., Zechmeister, E. B. &Zechmeister, J. (2012). Research methods in 
psychology. (9th ed..). NY: McGraw Hill. 
2. Elmes, D. G. (2011). Research Methods in Psychology (9thed.). Wadsworth Publishing.  
3. Goodwin, J. (2009). Research in Psychology: Methods in Design (6thed.). Wiley. 
4. McBurney, D. H. (2009). Research methods. (8th Ed.). Wadsworth Publishing. 
5. Forrester, M. A. (2010). Doing Qualitative Research in Psychology: A Practical Guide. 
Sage.  
 
Books for reference 
1. Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through 
Qualitative Analysis (Introducing Qualitative Methods series). New Delhi: Sage Publications.  
2. Dominowski, R. L. (1980). Research methods. N.J.: Engelwood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall.  
3. Embreston, S. E., & Raise, S. P. (2000). Item response theory for psychologists. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
4. Hambleton, R. K., &Swaminathan H. (1985). Item Response theory: Principles and 
Applications. Boston: Kluwer  
Page 47 of 84 
 
5. Hoyle, R. (1995). Structural equation modeling: concepts, issues and applications. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
6. Hulin, C. L., Drasgow, F. & Parsons, C.K. (1983). Item response theory: application to 
psychological measurement. Homewood,Il: Dow Jones-Irwin. 
7. Kerlinger, F. N. (1995). Foundations of behavioural research. New Delhi: Surjeet 
Publication. 
8. Lewis-Beck, M. S. (1994). International handbook of quantitative applications of social 
sciences. Sage: Topan/London. 
9. McBurney, D. H. (2001). How to Think Like a Psychologist: Critical Thinking in 
Psychology (2nd Edition). Prentice Hall. 
10. Monette, D. R., Sullivan, T. J., &DeJong, C. R. (1994). Applied psychological research: 
Tools for human services. (3rded.). California: Harcourt Brace College Publisher. 
11. Morse, J. M. (1994). Critical issues in qualitative research methods. Sage Publications. 
12. Nunnally, J. & Bernstein, I. (1994). Psychometric Theory (3rded.). New York: McGraw 
Hill. 
13. Robinson, P. W. (1976). Fundamentals of experimental designs: A comparative 
approach. Engelwood-Cliff: Prentice Hall. 
14. Smith, J. A. (2008). Qualitative Psychology: A Practical Guide to Research Methods. 
Sage. 
15. Strauss A L and Glaser, B. G. (1967).The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for 
Qualitative Research. Aldine Transaction. 
16. Wiling, C. (2008). Introducing Qualitative Research in Psychology (2nded). Open 
University Press. 
17. American Psychological Association. (2009). Publication Manual of the American 
Psychological Association (6thed.). APA. 
18. American Psychological Association. (2009). Concise Rules of APA Style (Concise Rules 
of the American Psychological Association (APA) Style). APA.  
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 Five topics shall be displayed in the beginning of the semester. Students shall write an 
essay on one of the topic in the classroom. The topics shall be announced : 20 marks 
 One test of descriptive type: 20 marks  
 One thematic paper: 10 marks 
Page 48 of 84 
 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
 Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be 
attempted. One of them could be a short note question that could combine more than 
one unit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 