
         
 
Copy forwarded for information and necessary action to :- 
 
1 The Deputy Registrar, (Admissions, Enrolment, Eligibility and  Migration Dept)(AEM), 
dr@eligi.mu.ac.in 
 
2 The Deputy Registrar, Result unit, Vidyanagari 
drresults@exam.mu.ac.in 
 
3 The Deputy Registrar, Marks and Certificate Unit,. Vidyanagari 
dr.verification@mu.ac.in 
 
4 The Deputy Registrar, Appointment Unit, Vidyanagari 
dr.appointment@exam.mu.ac.in 
 
5 The Deputy Registrar, CAP Unit, Vidyanagari 
cap.exam@mu.ac.in 
 
6 The Deputy Registrar, College Affiliations & Development Department (CAD), 
deputyregistrar.uni@gmail.com 
 
7 The Deputy Registrar, PRO, Fort, (Publication Section), 
Pro@mu.ac.in 
 
8 The Deputy Registrar, Executive Authorities Section (EA)  
eau120@fort.mu.ac.in  
 
He is requested to treat this as action taken report on the concerned resolution adopted by the 
Academic Council referred to the above circular. 
 
9 The Deputy Registrar, Research Administration & Promotion Cell (RAPC), 
rapc@mu.ac.in 
 
10 The Deputy Registrar, Academic Appointments & Quality Assurance (AAQA) 
dy.registrar.tau.fort.mu.ac.in   
ar.tau@fort.mu.ac.in  
 
11 The Deputy Registrar, College Teachers Approval Unit (CTA), 
concolsection@gmail.com 
 
12 The Deputy Registrars, Finance & Accounts Section, fort 
draccounts@fort.mu.ac.in 
 
13 The Deputy Registrar, Election Section, Fort 
drelection@election.mu.ac.in 
 
14 The Assistant Registrar, Administrative Sub-Campus Thane, 
thanesubcampus@mu.ac.in  
 
15 The Assistant Registrar, School of Engg. &  Applied Sciences,  Kalyan, 
ar.seask@mu.ac.in 
 
16 The Assistant Registrar, Ratnagiri Sub-centre, Ratnagiri, 
ratnagirisubcentre@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
  
1 
 
 
The Chairman, Board of Deans    
          
2 The Dean, Faculty of Humanities, 
 
3 Chairman, Board of Studies, 
 
4 The Director, Board of  Examinations and Evaluation, 
dboee@exam.mu.ac.in 
 
5 The Director, Board of Students Development,   
dsd@mu.ac.in@gmail.com                    DSW  direcotr@dsw.mu.ac.in 
 
 
6 The Director, Department of Information & Communication Technology, 
 
7 The Director, Institute of Distance and Open Learning (IDOL Admin),  
Vidyanagari, 
director@idol.mu.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
Copy for information :- 
 
1 P.A to Hon’ble Vice-Chancellor, 
vice-chancellor@mu.ac.in 
 
2 P.A to Pro-Vice-Chancellor 
pvc@fort.mu.ac.in 
 
3 P.A to Registrar, 
registrar@fort.mu.ac.in 
 
4 P.A to all Deans of all  Faculties 
 
5 P.A to Finance & Account Officers, (F & A.O),  
camu@accounts.mu.ac.in 
 
 1 
 
                                                                                    AC – 12/07/2024 
                                                                      Item No. – 5.7 (N) 
 
As Per NEP 2020 
 
  
                                  
   University of Mumbai 
 
 
 
 
Title of the program 
M.A (Psychology) 
 
 
 
Syllabus for 
Semester – Sem.- III & IV 
Ref: GR dated 16th May, 2023 for Credit Structure of PG 
 
(With effect from the academic year 2024-25) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 2 
 
 
 
                                     University of Mumbai 
                                
                                                         (As per NEP 2020) 
Sr.
No. 
Heading Particulars 
1 Title of program 
 
O:____________________ B 
M.A (Psychology) 
2 Scheme of Examination 
 
R:  ____________ 
NEP  
50% Internal  
50% External,  
Semester End Examination   
Individual Passing in Internal and External 
Examination 
 
3 Standards of Passing 
R: ______________ 
 
40% 
4 Credit Structure 
R: HSP-25A 
R: HSP-25B 
 
Attached herewith 
5 Semesters 
 
Sem. III and Sem IV 
6 Program Academic Level 6.5 
7 Pattern Semester 
8 Status New 
 
9 To be implemented from Academic Year  2024-25 
 
 
 
 
Sign of the BOS 
Chairman 
Name of the 
Chairman 
BOS in  
Sign of the                        
Offg. Associate Dean 
Name of the 
Associate Dean 
Faculty of  
Sign of the                        
Offg. Associate 
Dean 
Name of the 
Associate Dean 
Faculty of  
Sign of the                         
Offg. Dean 
Name of the Dean 
Faculty of  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 3 
 
 
Preamble 
1) Introduction 
The MA program in psychology at the University of Mumbai provides an excellent blend of 
theory and practice, making it one of the country's oldest and most prestigious applied 
programs. The program offers rigorous academic coursework and highly-practical 
training in four specialized areas: Clinical Psychology, Counselling Psychology, 
Industrial-Organizational Psychology, and Social-Community Psychology. 
The program includes mandatory courses, elective courses, practicals, practicums in four 
specializations, and extensive on-job field training. Its curriculum is meticulously crafted 
to address the demands and challenges of our diverse society. The program has a 
student-centered approach, focusing on individual students and trying to improve their 
knowledge, skills, and employability. 
Personality Psychology, Psychology of Cognition and Emotion, Evolutionary Psychology, 
Social Foundations of Human Behaviour, and Positive Psychology are core theoretical 
courses that provide students with theoretical frameworks and analytical tools to 
understand human behavior and society from a psychological standpoint. 
Aside from these fundamental courses, the program contains technical papers and a 
research methods component. These papers include Statistics for Psychology, 
Experimental Psychology Practical, Psychological Testing and Psychometrics Practical. 
These papers allow students to understand the methodologies used in psychological 
sciences thoroughly. The curriculum also covers cutting-edge techniques such as data 
analytics and machine learning. 
The optional papers provide specialized training in the four specializations' foundations. 
Psychopathology Across Lifespan and Psychodiagnostics are examples of electives for 
Clinical Psychology, Counselling Across Lifespan, Assessment in Counselling Psychology 
for Counselling Psychology, Organisational Behaviour and Competency-Based 
Assessment for Industrial-Organizational Psychology, and Community and Social 
Psychology and Assessment in Social Psychology for Social-Community Psychology. 
The course has a significant component of field placement and On-Job Training. The learners 
are placed in various organizations (Hospitals, academic institutions; Industries; NGOs 
etc.) to develop skills and become acquainted with varied organizations' nature, 
structure, and functioning.   
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 4 
 
Overall, the MA program in psychology at the University of Mumbai delivers a complete 
education that integrates theory and practical application, preparing students to thrive 
in various fields within psychology and making them competent professionals for 
interdisciplinary dialogue. 
 
2) Aims and Objectives 
1. To acquaint students with classical and contemporary knowledge systems, and critical 
perspectives in psychology 
2. To train students to develop different skills and competencies required in different 
fields of applied psychology 
3. To help students appreciate the scientific basis of the field of psychology and equip them 
with the necessary proficiency in the use of methodological, analytical and technological 
applications in doing psychological research 
4. To prepare students to be relevant to the community, so that they can develop and use 
learnings from psychological science for the betterment of society and to solve human 
problems. 
5. To expose students to on field/job training, which will help them gain first-hand 
experience and develop the required skills to prepare them to deal with the issues and 
challenges they would face in the world of work.  
 
3) Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will be able to understand and apply the theoretical, scientific and applied 
knowledge and skills of psychology  
2. Students will be able to design and execute research studies to advance the scientific 
know-how in the field of psychology 
3. Students will be proficient in use of psychological assessment tools and techniques to 
better understand human problems and devise appropriate interventions and solutions 
appropriately 
4. Students will be acquainted with different areas and schools of psychology in a way to 
understand the interlinkages between these areas and the holistic applications of the 
same. 
5. Students will be equipped with industry relevant skills such as applications of Data 
Analytics and Machine Learning, Psychometry, Statistical Analysis, Psychotherapy etc. 
 5 
 
 
4) Any other point (if any)  
For admission in Semester I: For students applying for MA Psychology from University of 
Mumbai or other universities after Bachelor’s degree, the average of SEM V and SEM VI 
marks of psychology papers alone shall be considered as criteria for merit list. Students 
completing BA with regular mode shall be given priority.  
 
For admission in Semester III after four year BA: For students applying for MA 
Psychology from University of Mumbai or other universities after Bachelor’s degree, the 
average of SEM V; SEM VI; VII; and VIII marks of psychology papers alone shall be 
considered as criteria for merit list. Students completing BA with regular mode shall be 
given priority.  
 
 
 
  
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 6 
 
Credit Structure of the Program (SEM III and IV) 
Semester III Structure 
 
R: HSP-25B 
Year 
(2year 
PG) 
Level Sem 
(2 
years) 
Major  RM OJT
/FP 
RP Cum. 
Cr. 
Degree 
   Mandatory Elective (Any one)      
II 6.5 SEM III Course 1: Intervention systems and 
Skills of Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Biological Basis of 
Human Behavior (4 cr) 
Course 3: Legal Perspectives in 
Psychology and Praxis (4 cr) 
Course 4: Data Analytics and 
Machine Learning applications to 
Psychology (2 cr) 
Practical Courses (PC) 
Course 1: Practicum In Clinical 
Psychology: Psychopathology And 
Neuropsychological Diagnostics And 
Management (PC) (4 cr) 
Course 2: Practicum in 
Counseling Psychology (PC) 
Course 3: Practicum in Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology (PC) 
Course 4: Practicum in Social 
Psychology (PC) 
NIL NIL Research 
Project in 
Psychology I: 
Preparing 
Research 
Proposal  
(4 cr) 
22 PG 
Degree 
after 3 
years of 
UG 
    Theoretical Courses (TH)  
Course 5: Political Psychology (TH) (4 
Cr) 
Course 6: Behavioral Economics (TH) 
(4 Cr) 
Course 7: Advanced Skills and 
Processes for counseling and 
Psychotherapy (TH) (4 Cr) 
     
 7 
 
Semester IV Structure 
 
 
 
 SEM 
IV 
Course 1: Critical and Theoretical 
Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Human Resource 
Management (4 cr) 
Course 3: Cultural Psychology (4 cr) 
Theoretical Courses  
Specialization Electives 
Course 1: Psychotherapy for 
Clinical Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 2: Career Counselling 
and World of Work (4 Cr) 
Course 3: Organizational 
Development (4 Cr) 
Course 4: Social Problems: 
Skills and Interventions (4 Cr) 
 
General Electives  
Course 5: Consumer 
Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 6: Psychology for 
Conservation and Climate 
Change (4 Cr) 
Course 7: Peace Psychology 
Course 8: CBT and REBT (4 
Cr) 
NIL NIL Research 
Project in 
Psychology 
II: Research 
Dissertation 
(6 cr) 
22  
   14 + 12 = 26 4 + 4 = 8   4 + 6 = 10 44  
 
Sign of Chairperson BoS, Psychology 
Name of Chairperson BoS, 
Psychology: Dr. Vivek Belhekar 
Name of the Faculty: Humanities 
 
Sign Dean 
Name of Dean: Dr. Anil Singh 
Name of the Faculty: Humanities 
 

 
 
 
 
Syllabus: M.A (Psychology)  
(NEP2020) 
 
Semester I   Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Course 1 Credits 4 Personality Psychology 
Course 2 Credits 4 Psychology of Cognition and Emotion 
Course 3 Credits 4 Statistics for Psychology 
Course 4 Credits 2 Experimental Psychology Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Psychopathology Across Lifespan 
OR 
Counselling Across Lifespan 
OR 
Organizational Behaviour 
OR 
Community and Social Psychology 
 
Research Methodology (Credits 4) 
 Research Methodology in Psychology 
 
Semester II   Level 6.0  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Course 1 Credits 4 Evolutionary Psychology 
Course 2 Credits 4 Social Foundations of Human Behaviour 
Course 3 Credits 4 Positive Psychology 
Course 4 Credits 2 Psychological Testing and Psychometrics Practicals 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Psychodiagnostics 
OR 
Assessment in Counselling Psychology 
OR 
Competency Based Assessment  
OR 
Assessment in Social Psychology         
 
On the Job Training (OJT/FP) (Credits 4) 
On the Job training in Different Psychology related work sectors 
 
  
 
 9 
Semester III   Level 6.5  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 14) 
Course 1: Intervention systems and Skills of Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Biological Basis of Human Behavior (4 cr) 
Course 3: Legal Perspectives in Psychology and Praxis (4 cr) 
Course 4: Data Analytics and Machine Learning applications to Psychology (2 cr) 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Practical Courses (PC) 
Course 1: Practicum in Clinical Psychology (PC) (4 cr) 
OR 
Course 2: Practicum in Counseling Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Course 3: Practicum in Industrial and Organizational Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Course 4: Practicum in Social Psychology (PC) 
OR 
Theoretical Courses (TH)  
Course 5: Political Psychology (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 6: Behavioral Economics (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 7: Advanced Skills and Processes for counseling and Psychotherapy (TH) (4 Cr) 
 
Research Project Course (Credits 4) 
Research Project in Psychology I: Preparing Research Proposal (4 Cr) 
 
Semester IV   Level 6.5  Cumulative Credits = 22 
 
Mandatory Course (Credits 12) 
Course 1: Critical and Theoretical Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Human Resource Management (4 cr) 
Course 3: Cultural Psychology (4 cr) 
 
Elective Course (Credits 4) 
Theoretical Courses  
Course 1: Psychotherapy for Clinical Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 2: Career Counselling and World of Work (4 Cr) 
Course 3: Organizational Development (4 Cr) 
Course 4: Social Problems: Skills and Interventions (4 Cr) 
Course 5: Consumer Psychology (4 Cr) 
Course 6: Psychology for Conservation and Climate Change (4 Cr) 
Course 7: Peace Psychology 
Course 8: CBT and REBT (4 Cr) 
 
Research Project Course (Credits 6) 
Research Project in Psychology II: Research Dissertation (6 Cr) 
 
 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sem. - III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEM III: Mandatory Courses 
SEM III Mandatory Course (Credits 14)  
Course 1: Intervention systems and Skills of Psychology (4 cr) 
Course 2: Biological Basis of Human Behavior (4 cr) 
Course 3: Legal Perspectives in Psychology and Praxis (4 cr) 
Course 4: Data Analytics and Machine Learning applications to Psychology (2 cr) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 12 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Intervention systems and Skills of Psychology 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04      Hours: 60 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To analyse the different forces in psychotherapy   
2. To examine various systems of psychological intervention. 
3. To evaluate the approach of and processes in group therapy 
4. To orient students with eclectic, multicultural, constructivist approaches to interventions. 
 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Students will be able to understand how different theories and influence shaped the approaches to 
counselling and psychotherapy 
 CO2: Students will be able understand the systems, processes, interventions in counselling and 
psychotherapy 
CO3: Students would be able critically examine traditional approaches to counselling and psychotherapy in 
the context of cultural context, eclectic orientation and the role of constructivism. 
CO4: Students will be able to apply this knowledge to different areas of psychological practice. 
 
Unit 1. Psychoanalytical and Cognitive-Behavioural Approaches 
a. Sigmund Freud- Classic psychoanalysis 
b. Alfred Adler-Individual psychology 
c. Behaviour therapy 
d. Aaron Beck- Cognitive therapy and Cognitive Behaviour Therapy 
Unit 2. Humanistic-Existential and Client Centered Approaches 
a. Carl Rogers- Person centered therapy 
b. Existential Therapy 
c. Gestalt Therapy 
d. Reality Therapy 
Unit 3. Group Therapy 
a. Fundamentals: Influences and advantages of group therapy 
b. Processes: Organizing a group, opening and later sessions, technical functions of group 
therapists.  
b. Special problems during group therapy  
c. Group therapy approaches: pre‐intake and post‐intake, special age groups, behavior therapy, 
experiential therapy, psychodrama and role play.  
 
 13 
 
Unit 4. Approaches emphasizing Integration, Eclectic Systems, Context and Constructivism  
a. Integrated and eclectic interventions 
b. Effective multicultural counselling  
c. Feminist Therapy 
d. Family Systems Therapy 
 
Books for study  
1. Corey, G. (2009). Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy (8th ed.). CA: Thomson 
Brooks. 
2. Kress, V. E. Seligman, L. & Reichenberg, L. W. (2021). Theories of counseling and psychotherapy 
systems, strategies, and skills (5th ed.). Pearson. 
3. Flanagan, J.S. & Flanagan, R.S. (2018). Counseling and Psychotherapy theories in context and 
practice: Skills Strategies and Techniques (3rd ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc 
4. Gladding, S.T. (2022). Theories of Counselling (3rd ed.). Rowman and Littlefield 
5. Wolberg, L. R. (2005). The Technique of Psychotherapy Part I and II. NJ: Jason Aronson Inc.  
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• Essay on one of the topics randomly assigned: 20 marks 
• Frist classroom test of descriptive types: 15 marks 
• Second classroom test of descriptive types: 15marks 
Semester end examination: 50 marks 
Paper pattern: 7questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which   5         are to be attempted. One of them 
could be short notes question, which could combine more than one unit. 
  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 14 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Biological Basis of Human Behaviour 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04      Hours: 60 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the role of biological and neurological aspects that influence the human behaviour  
2. To develop understanding of Psychobiology of Sensorimotor System and Motivation and Emotion. 
3. To develop understanding of the neurobiological basis of the cognition, emotion and motivation 
4. To evaluate role of biological systems in psychology  
 
  Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Students will be able to understand structure of the biological systems and neurological systems.  
CO2: Students will be able understand the role of biological systems in sensory motor, cognition, 
motivation, and emotion.  
CO3: Students would be able critically examine various biological systems in psychological aspects.  
CO4: Students will be able to apply this knowledge to different areas of psychological functioning. 
 
Unit 1: Brain and Nerves System  
a. Nervous System: Structure and function of Brain: CNS, PNS. Neuron: Structure. Neural conduction 
and Synaptic transmission.   
b. Foundations: Human genetics, Human evolution, and Behaviour 
c. Endocrine system. Immune Systems. 
d. Cerebral Specialization. Brain Plasticity. 
 
Unit 2: Psychobiology of Sensorimotor System  
a. Methods of investigating: Methods of Visualizing and Stimulating the Living Human Brain; 
Recording Human Psychophysiological Activity; Invasive Physiological Research Methods. 
Pharmacological Research method. Genetic Engineering.  
b. Behavioural Research Methods of Biopsychology 
c. Neuropsychology of Visual system, Hearing, Touch, Smell, & Taste.  
d. Neuropsychology of the Sensorimotor System.  
 
Unit 3: Psychobiology of Motivation and Emotion 
a. Neuropsychological basis of Thirst and Hunger.  
b. Neuropsychological basis of sleep.  
c. Neuropsychological basis of Sex. 
d. Neuropsychological basis of Emotion. 
 
 
 15 
 
Unit 4: Psychobiology of Cognition 
a. Neuropsychology of Attention. Brains, minds and consciousness  
b. Neuropsychology of Language. 
c. Neuropsychology of Learning, Memory, and Amnesia.  
d. Neuropsychology of Executive Functions.  
 
Books for study:  
1. Pinel, J. P. J. (2017). Biopsychology. Pearson.  
2. Zilmer, E. A. & Spears, M. V. (2001). Principals of neuropsychology. Canada: Wadsworth 
3. Carlson, N. (2010). Physiology of behaviour. Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
 
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 One test of descriptive types OR Reflection papers: 20 marks 
 Essay on one of the topic randomly assigned  OR Reflection papers: 20 marks  
 One presentation/ Review Submission/ Project Submission: 10 marks 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be attempted. One of them 
could be a short note question. Questions could combine more than one unit 
 
  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 16 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Subject Code:  
Course Name: Legal Perspectives in Psychology and Praxis 
Type of Course: Mandatory 
                        Semester: III                                                                    Level: 6.5 
  Credit: 04                                                                         Hours: 60 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To provide a comprehensive understanding of global mental health law evolution, considering 
historical, political, and societal factors. 
2. To examine the influence of international standards and organizations, like the UN and WHO, on 
legislations related to psychology and praxis. 
3. To analyze India's mental health laws, including the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, and 
the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, along with current challenges and future directions. 
4. To evaluate human rights and legal perspectives in relation to mental health, disabilities, gender and 
children. 
 
   Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Students will be able to understand international standards of human rights and legal discourses 
pertaining to mental health 
CO2: Students will be able to acquainted with mental health laws in India, its meaning and implications. 
CO3: Students would be able critically examine legal perspectives in relation to disability, gender and 
children as protective and empowering mechanisms. 
CO4: Students will be able to apply this knowledge to different areas of psychological practice. 
 
Unit 1: Role of International Standards in Mental Health  
a) The Pre-history of Mental Health Legislation 
b) The United Nations' Influence on Mental Health Legislation  
b) The World Health Organization's Impact on Mental Health Legislation  
d) Universal Declaration of Human rights and Human Dignity 
 
Unit 2: Mental Health Legislation in India 
a) Evolution of Mental Health Laws in India 
b) The Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 
c) Analysis of India’s Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, its congruence with and departures with WHO 
Guidelines. 
d) Analysis of India’s Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, its congruence and departure from UN Convention 
on Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2006 (UNCRPD). 
 
 
 17 
 
Unit 3: Disabilities and Legal provisions for their Rehabilitation, Inclusion and Empowerment in India 
a) Analyzing Persons with disabilities act (1995) and its limitations in the context of UNCRPD, 2006 
b) The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 in India 
b) Rehabilitation Council of India Act (1992) and its implications for rehabilitation related practice. 
c) The Relevance of and Provisions under the National Trust Act (1999)  
 
 
Unit 4: Legal Protection in the Context of Gender and Child in India 
a) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 and related sections of the IPC (Indian Penal Code) 
b) Sexual Harassment: POSCO (Amendment) Act (2019) and POSH Act (2013)  
c) Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 
d) Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 and Decriminalisation of Section 377 of IPC 
 
Books for Reference 
Caudill, O. B., & Pope, K. S. (1995). Law & Mental Health Professionals: California. American 
Psychological Association. 
Deb, S., Subhalakshmi, G., & Chakraborti, K. (Eds.). (2021). Upholding Justice: Social, 
Psychological and Legal Perspectives. Routledge. 
Duffy, R. M., & Kelly, B. D. (2020). India’s Mental Healthcare Act, 2017: Building Laws, 
Protecting Rights. Springer 
Gooding, P. (2017). A new era for mental health law and policy. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316493106 
Jones, K. (2023). A history of the mental health services (1st ed.). Routledge.  
Kelly, B. D. (2015). Dignity, Mental health and Human Rights: Coercion and the Law. Routledge 
Kretzmer, D., & Klein, E. (Eds.). (2021). The concept of human dignity in human rights discourse. 
Brill. 
Niumai, A., & Chauhan, A. (Eds.). (2022). Gender, Law and Social Transformation in India. 
Springer Nature. 
Unsworth, C. (1987). The politics of mental health legislation. Oxford University Press 
 
Articles for References: 
Bharte, U.L. (2024). The United Nations and Mental Health: Rights Based Approach and Beyond. 
In B. Sharma, & A.C. Khimta (Eds.). United Nations: The Issue of Restructuring and 
Effectiveness (pp. 95-119). Yash Publications. 
Gupta, N. K. (2022). “A riddled restitution”—The Indian journey from the recognition of the 
third gender towards the Queer. Sexuality, Gender & Policy, 5(1), 87-99. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/sgp2.12042 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 18 
 
Hagenaars, P. (2016). Towards a human rights based and oriented psychology. Psychology and 
Developing Societies, 28(2), 183-202. 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/0971333616657170 
Kelly, B. D. (2016). Mental health, mental illness, and human rights in India and elsewhere: 
What are we aiming for?. Indian journal of psychiatry, 58(Suppl 2), S168-S174. 
https://journals.lww.com/indianjpsychiatry/fulltext/2016/58002 
Kothari, J. (2010). The UN convention on rights of persons with disabilities: an engine for law 
reform in India. Economic and Political Weekly, 45 (18), 65-72. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/25664414 
Math, S. B., Gowda, G. S., Basavaraju, V., Manjunatha, N., Kumar, C. N., Philip, S., & Gowda, M. 
(2019). The rights of persons with disability act, 2016: Challenges and opportunities. Indian 
journal of psychiatry, 61(Suppl 4), S809-S815. 
https://journals.lww.com/indianjpsychiatry/fulltext/2019/61004  
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 Essay on one of the topics randomly assigned: 15 marks 
 One classroom test of descriptive types: 20 marks  
 Critical Analysis of any one Legislation (Classroom Test): 15 marks 
 
Semester end examination: 50 marks 
Paper pattern: 7questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which   5         are to be attempted. One of them 
could be short notes question, which could combine more than one unit. 
 
 
 
  
 
 19 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Data Analytics and Machine Learning Applications to Psychology 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 02      Hours: 30 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To provide a comprehensive understanding of ML and data analysitics. 
2. To examine evaluate the role of data analytics in psychology. 
3. To understand and analyze application of AI-ML to psychology  
4. To be able to use software for ML algo’s 
 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
        CO1: Students will be able to understand AI and ML  
       CO2: Students will be able to acquainted with AI and ML types  
       CO3: Students would be able critically examine utility of AIL ML to psychology  
       CO4: Students will be able to apply this knowledge to different areas of psychological practice. 
 
 
Unit 1: Data Analytics: Machine Learning 
A. Principles and Practices of Machine Learning and Data Analytics.  
B. Supervised and Unsupervised Machine Learning. 
C. Algorithms for Univariate Outcomes.  
D. Algorithms for Multivariate Outcomes.  
E. Deep Learning. 
 
Unit 2: Applications of ML to Psychology  
A. Alternative Data Types: Text Analytics.  
B. Psychometrics and AI. 
C. Social Network. 
D. Analysis of Visual and Auditory Data.  
E.    Other applications 
 
References:  
A. Jacobucci, R., Grimm, KJ, Zhang, Z. (2023). Machine Learning for Social and Behavioral Research. 
Guilford.  
B.  Belhekar, V. M. (2019). Machine Learning applications to Psychology and Behavioral Science: A 
case of Personality Psychology. Bombay Psychologists, 32, 63-72. 
C. Trappenberg, T. (2020). Fundamentals of Machine Learning. OUP.  
D. Ghosh, C. (2022). Data Analysis with Machine Learning for Psychologists. Springer. 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 20 
 
E. Kumar, J. and Pai, M. (2024). Using Machine Learning to Detect Emotions and Predict Human 
Psychology. IGI.  
F.  Nokeri, TC. (2022). Artificial Intelligence in Medical Sciences and Psychology: With Application of 
Machine Language, Computer Vision, and NLP Techniques. Apress.  
G.  Chauhan, A., Belhekar, V., Sehgal, S., Singh, H., Prakash, J. (2024). Identifying significant 
emotional events in countries using Twitter. Frontiers of Psychology. Sec. Emotion 
Science, Vol 14. 
 
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 25 marks 
 Essay on one of the topics randomly assigned: 10 marks 
 One classroom activity-based test: 15 marks  
Semester end examination: 25 marks 
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 05 marks each, out of which   5         are to be attempted.  
 
 
 
  
 
 21 
 
 
 
SEM III: Elective Courses 
SEM III: Elective Courses  
Practical Courses (PC) 
Course 1: Practicum in Clinical Psychology (PC) (4 cr) 
OR 
Course 2: Practicum in Counseling Psychology (PC) (4 cr) 
OR 
Course 3: Practicum in Industrial and Organizational Psychology (PC) (4 cr) 
OR 
Course 4: Practicum in Social Psychology (PC) (4 cr) 
OR 
Theoretical Courses (TH)  
Course 5: Political Psychology (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 6: Behavioral Economics (TH) (4 Cr) 
OR 
Course 7: Advanced Skills and Processes for counseling and Psychotherapy (TH) (4 Cr) 
 
 
 
  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 22 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Practicum In Clinical Psychology: Psychopathology And Neuropsychological 
Diagnostics And Management 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04     Hours: 27 hrs/ week/each student 
 
Objectives: 
1. To familiarize students with hands on work in the field of clinical psychology 
2. To acquaint students with knowledge and skills required for history and mental status examination and 
differential diagnosis using standardized diagnostic tools. 
 
Course Objectives: 
CO1: Conduct clinical interview, case history, and create case formulation. Conduct MSE.  
CO2: demonstrate leaning of psychological assessment and psychodiagnostics assessment in clinical 
psychology 
CO3: Conduct clinical assessment and develop diagnostic impression under DSM  and ICD systems 
CO4: Plan and demonstrate psychotherapy sessions for clinical problems.  
  
Practical/Field Work Component (Elective Component):  
 
04 credits. 3 batches. 3-day Practical field-work of 9 hours each = 3 days X 3 batches X 9 hrs  = 81 hrs/ 
week. 
 
PRACTICUM IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: PSYCHOPATHOLOGY AND 
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSTICS AND MANAGEMENT 
 Only 25% students can be admitted from the MA student strength in each elective since limited number of 
students can be accommodated on the field work. 
 The workload for this paper is of 04 credits. 3 batches of students are made with 8 students per batch. 3-
day Practical field-work of 9 hours each day per week is conducted = 3 days X 3 batches X 9 hours = 81 
hrs/ week. 
 Setting: The student will be placed in various field work settings through the semester as per the 
availability of the filed setting, a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric IPD-OPD. In case of unavailability of 
filed placement, same activities can be carried out in the practical manner in the department 
classroom/laboratory, and the internal evaluation can be based on simulated cases.  
 
Unit 1: Interview in clinical settings 
a. Behavioral observation 
b. History taking 
c. Mental status examination and MMSE 
d. Syntheses of information from different sources 
 
 23 
 
Unit 2: Identification of adult and Child psychopathological conditions 
a. Psychotic spectrum disorders, Neurotic spectrum disorders and mood disorders 
b. Neurocognitive disorders, other conditions 
c. Pervasive developmental disorders, Disruptive behavior disorders 
d. Learning related disorders, other childhood conditions 
Unit 3: Test administration in clinical settings 
a. Ability assessment: clinical profiling based on Wechsler Tests 
b. Personality assessment: MMPI, MCMI, Rorschach, TAT 
c. Neuropsychological assessment: BGT and BGT- II, NIMHANS battery, unitary measures of 
neuropsychological dysfunctions. 
d. Scale and questionnaire administration, choice of tools- HARS, HDRS, SCL 90, BDI, CARS 
Unit 4: Integration of findings and Helping Behavior 
a. Test profile generation and integration, Integration with observation and interview findings 
b. Differential diagnosis and diagnosis: DSM and ICD, combining tests, MSE, and Interview findings, 
Communication of diagnosis to patients and family members, suggested management plan. 
c. Explanation of condition and psycho-education, Planning intervention, process and termination 
d. Report generation, prognosis, Documentation of assessment and management: process and finding 
Books for study 
1. Hersen, M. (2004).Comprehensive Handbook of Psychological Assessment: Intellectual and 
neuropsychological assessment(Vol. 1); Personality assessment (Vol. 2); Behavioral assessment(Vol. 
3). NY: Wiley. 
2. Flanagan J.S. and Flanagan, R.S. (2012).Clinical interviewing (4th ed.) New Jersey: John Wiley and 
Co. 
3. Fontes, L. A. (2008).Interviewing clients across cultures:A practitioners’ guide. NY: The Guilford 
Press. 
4. Lezak, M., Howieson, D.B., Bigler, E. & Trandl, D. (2012).Neuropsychological assessment (5th ed.). 
London: OUP. 
5. Schoenberg, M.R. & Scott, J.G. (2011).The Little Black book of neuropsychology. NY: Springer. 
Books for reference 
1. Feinberg, T.E. &Farah, M.J. (2003).Behavioral neurology and neuropsychology (2nd ed.). NY: McGraw 
Hill. 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
• File: Under the supervision of course teacher, reports to be submitted on cases seen during the semester: 20 
marks 
• File: Planning and recording of intervention plan for at least 3 case studies: 15 marks 
• Presentation: Classroom presentation of at least one case in a case presentation format along with test 
profiles and therapy plan: 15 marks 
Semester end practical examination: 50 marks 
• Viva voce examination: 35 marks 
• Test Instruction and Conduction based on simulated case vignette: 5 marks 
• Report based on simulated cases provided at the time of examination: 10 marks 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 24 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Subject Code:  
         Course Name: Practicum in Counseling Psychology 
Type of Course: Elective 
                       Semester: III                                                                   Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04                                                                 Hours: 27 hrs/ week/ each student 
 
Only 25% students can be admitted from the MA student strength in each elective since limited 
number of students can be accommodated on the field work.  
 
Workload: 04 credits. 3 batches. 3-day Practical field-work of 9 hours each = 3 X 3 X 9 = 81 hrs/ week. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. To provide practical experience to understand the role of interview, observation and 
case‐history in assessment of clients. 
2. To increase understanding the assessment of personality and cognitive development on field. 
3. To equip in skills for counseling and career development across the lifespan       
4. To train for case presentation and reporting 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Students will be able to understand the basics in counselling psychology practice. 
CO2: Students will be able use assessment techniques and tests for counselling psychology. 
CO3: Students would be able to arrive at case conceptualization, goal setting, intervention plan formulation 
and evaluate its effectiveness. 
CO4: Students will be able to engage case studies presentation and case report generation as an essential 
process of counselling psychology practice. 
 
Unit 1: Techniques of assessment and skill development exercise  
a. Intake Interview, projective questions, observational techniques and case history 
b. Selection of appropriate psychological tests, functional and behavioural assessment  
c. Role play, transcription and analysis, case studies, movie screenings/video analysis  
d. Case presentations and group discussions; field work, field visits  
 
 
Unit 2: Training in test administration, scoring and interpretation in counselling settings  
a. Assessment of development and special difficulties 
b. Assessment of cognitive abilities  
c. Personality assessment and Projective Tests 
 
 25 
d. Career related assessment 
 
Unit 3: Diverse areas of counselling and case studies- field work or Internship (Should be 
supervised by the course teacher). A minimum of 3 counselling case studies need to be 
conducted in either of the areas 
a. Career counselling at High school (Group assessment followed by individual counselling)  
b. School Counselling/ Child Counselling: learning disability, slow learners, under achiever, 
socially disadvantaged, emotionally disturbed, exceptional/gifted or any other childhood 
related or developmental problems and counselling of parents of identified children.  
c. Counselling for Adult/ Adolescent related issues: Conducting case studies on alcoholics/ drug 
addicts/ persons with disabilities/ attempted suicide, gender and queer affirmative 
counselling. 
d. Counselling the Elderly (Institutional or Non institutional Settings) 
Unit 4: Psychological interventions and reporting  
a. Case conceptualization, explanation of condition and psycho‐education 
b. Intervention: planning, process and termination 
c. Documentation of assessment and management process  
d. Report writing 
 
Books for references  
1. Bor, R., Jo Bbner‐Landy, Gilli, S., Brace,C. (2002). Counselling in Schools. New Delhi: Sage 
Publications Ltd  
2. Geldard, K., and Geldard, D. (2004). Counselling Adolescents. New Delhi: Sage Publications.  
3. Lewis, J.A., Dana, R.Q., Blevins, G.A. (2011). Substance Abuse Counselling(4th ed.). Belmont, 
C.A: Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning.  
4. Velleman, R. (2011). Counselling for Alcohol Problems (3rd ed.). New Delhi: Sage Publications.  
5. Reeves, A. (2010). Counselling Suicidal Clients. New Delhi: Sage Publications.  
6. Chandler, L.A., Johnson,V.J. (1991). Using Projective Techniques with Children. Illinois: Charles 
Thomas Publisher.  
7. Gerald, G. & Michel, H. (2001). Handbook of Psychological Assessment (3rd ed.). New York: 
Pergamon Press  
8. Groth-Marnat, G & Wright, A.J. (2016). Handbook of Psychological Assessment (6th ed.). Wiley.  
9. Jongsma, A.E. (2014). Child Psychotherapy: Homework Planner (5th Ed.). New Jersey: John 
Wiley & Sons.  
10. Niles, S. & Harris‐Bowlsbey, J. (2009). Career development interventions in the 21st Century 
(3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 26 
 
11. Wright, B.A. (1983).Physical disability: A psychosocial approach (2nd ed.). New York, NY: 
Harper & Row.  
12. Herr, E.L., and Cramer, S.H. (2003). Career guidance and counselling through the life span: 
Systematic approaches (6thed.) Boston: Allynand Bacon.  
13. Ko, H., Mehta, K.K., Meng, K.S. (2006). Understanding and Counselling Older Persons: A 
Handbook. Singapore: Sage  
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks  
Counselling training and detailed case reports to be submitted on individual case studies and 
interventions (minimum 3 cases) conducted during the semester, test reports, field visits, 
counselling training reports: 30 marks 
Detailed test reports, field visits: 10 marks 
Classroom presentation of at least one case in prescribed format along with test profiles and 
therapy plan: 10 marks  
 
Semester end Practical examination: 50 marks 
Viva voce examination: 30 marks 
2 simulated cases (case vignette) provided at the time of examination: 20 marks  
 
  
 
 27 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Subject Code:  
                              Course Name: PRACTICUM IN INDUSTRIAL PSYCHOLOGY 
Type of Course: Elective 
                      Semester: III                                                                   Level: 6.5 
            Credit: 04                                                                 Hours: 27 hrs/ week / each student  
 
Workload: 04 credits. 3 batches. 3-day Practical field-work of 9 hours each = 3 X 3 X 9 = 81 hrs/ 
week. 
 
Only 25% students can be admitted from the MA student strength in each elective since limited 
number of students can be accommodated on the field work. 
 
Objectives: 
1. To acquaint students with the applications of psychometric tools and inventories in 
organizations 
2. To acquaint the students with the tools of behavioral and organizational interventions & develop 
the skills to analyze behavioral issues in organizations. 
3. To gain firsthand experience through organized field visit to organizations. 
4. To gain firsthand experience through focused group discussions. 
 
Course Objectives  
CO1: Analyze a situation and formulate appropriate action plans 
CO2: Demonstrate skills and techniques for team work, collaboration, conflict resolution etc 
CO3: Develop the skills to conceptualize, formulate, design and conducted structured 
experiences 
CO4: Assess, evaluate and synthesize observations, reflections, and learning into reports. 
 
Unit 1: Structured experience :( any two in consultation with the supervisor) 
Students should plan, design and conduct the structured exercises in any of the following areas under 
supervisor supervision: self-awareness, team building, interpersonal skills, leadership skills, 
perception, decision making and problem solving, creativity, power and politics, communication 
skills, conflict, stress management, motivation and goal setting, or any recent developments. 
 
Unit 2: HRD instruments: (any five: administered, scored, interpreted and discussed) 
Role efficacy, role stress, coping styles, HRD climate, TOBI, SPRIO, MAO‐ B, emotional intelligence, 
enneagram, conflict management styles, OCTAPACE, leadership, trust, life and  goal planning or 
any recent developments. 
 
 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 28 
 
 
Unit 3: Field visit: (any two field visit) 
 
Students will get firsthand experience of the organization. Can take up any project given by the 
organization and write a report. A student can undertake specific or overall activity of the organizations 
in consultation with the supervisor. The student can choose any two organizations and write a report: 
education sector, government sector, health sector, banking sector, service industry, NGO, or any 
recent developments 
 
Unit 4: Force-field analysis and Appreciative Inquiry 
Students will conduct with the help of supervisor all the steps of force field analysis (identifying the 
problem and identifying the desired state; identifying the forces involved, and determining the strengths 
of each force. Action plans for increasing driving forces and reducing restraining forces and 
appreciative inquiry (4 D approach: discovery, dreaming, designing and destiny) as an OD intervention. 
After conducting the same students will write the report of the same. 
 
Unit 5: Focused Group Discussion 
Student conduct a focus group either based on need diagnostic or problem focused group study in any area 
of consumer behavior (customers of sales, retail, banking, insurance, aviation etc) or industrial/ 
organizational psychology/human resource and submit a report. 
 
a) Select the team 
b) Select the participants 
c) Decide on time and location 
d) Prepare for and conduct focus group discussion 
e) Submit a repor 
Books for reference 
 
 Barbour, R. (2007). Doing Focus Groups. Los Angeles: Sage Publications. 
 Clark, A.W. (1976). Experimenting with organizational life: The action research approach. New York: 
Plenum Press. 
 Cooperrider, D.L., Whitney, D. &Stavros, J.M. (2008).Appreciative Inquiry Handbook: For 
Leaders of Change (2nd ed.). San Francisco, USA: Berrett – Koehler Publishers Inc. 
 French, W.L., Cecil, H.B., & Vohra, V. (2009). Organizational Development: Behavioral Science 
Interventions for Organization Improvement (6th ed.). New Delhi: Prentice Hall. 
 Krueger, R.A., Casey, M.A. (2009).Focus Groups: A practical guide for Applied Research (4th ed.). 
Los Angeles: Sage Publications, Los Angeles. 
 Litosselitti, L. (2003).Using Focus Groups in Research. New York, NY:Continuum. 
 Pareek, U. & Purhoit, S. (2010).Training Instruments in HRD and OD (3rd ed.). New Delhi: Tata 
McGraw Hill. 
 
 29 
 Pfeiffer, J.W. &Jones, J.E. (1973). A Handbook of structured Experiences for Human Relations 
Training. San Diego, CA: University Associates Inc. 
 Sayeed, O.B & Pareek, U. (2000). Actualizing Managerial Roles: Studies in Role Efficacy. New 
Delhi: Tata McGraw – Hill Publishing Company Limited. 
 Watkins, J.M., Bernard, J., Kelly, M.R. (2011).Appreciative Inquiry: Change at the Speed of Imagination 
(2nd ed.). USA: John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
 
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 Marks 
 Report Submission for Structured experience: 20 Marks  
 Report for HRD Instruments and Field Visit: 10 Marks 
 Report Submission for Force-Field Analysis and Appreciative Inquiry: 10 Marks Report Submission for Focus 
Group Discussions: 10 Marks 
 
Semester end examination:  
50 Marks  
Viva: 30 Marks 
Exam: 20 Marks: Paper Pattern: 3 questions to be set of 10 marks each out of which 2 are to be 
attempted. 
  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 30 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Subject Code:  
Course Name: Practicum In Social Psychology 
Type of Course: Elective 
                      Semester: III                                                                   Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04                                                                 Hours: 27 hrs/ week/ each student 
 
Objectives:‐  
1. To prepare students to appreciate socially relevant and practical concerns in the surrounding 
2. To orient students towards varied social issues through field visists and placements 
3. To help students to gain research experience while conducting social experiment 
4. To enable students with necessary skills in conducting structured exercise and FGD. 
 
Course Outcomes:- 
1. Students will acquire the knowledge of various socially relevant issues 
2. Students will be able to demonstrate skills necessary for conducting social experiment 
3. Students will acquire skills necessary for conducting structured exercise and FGD 
4. Students will be able to apply such knowledge in solving real life issues 
 
Workload: 04 credits. 3 batches. 3-day Practical field-work of 9 hours each = 3 X 3 X 9 = 81 hrs/ 
week. 
 
Unit 1. Field Visits and Placements 
Students will be placed in institutions/organizations in consultation with the course teacher. Students will 
have to study from social psychological perspective the individual cases (case study). Students will have 
to submit two detailed case study reports. 
 
Unit 2. Structured Exercise 
Structured exercise (any two). In consultation with the course -teacher, students are required to plan, design 
and conduct structured exercises in any of the following areas: self ‐ awareness, team ‐ building, 
interpersonal skills, leadership skills, decision making, problem solving, creativity, communication, 
conflict management, and stress management.  
 
Unit 3. Social/Field Experiment 
The students will be divided in three/four groups depending on the number of students enrolled in the course 
and other factors. Students beloning to each group are supposed to identify a social problem in the society 
and will have to make presentations of proposals of field experimen t surrounding the problem at hand. 
Once all the presentations are done, one field experiment would be selected for each group as the group’s 
activity, and all students from the respective groups then will work on that group assignment. All 
three/four groups will have to submit a brief report of their assignment containing their analysis from 
social psychological perspective. In their final report they are also required to include their initial 
individual experiments presented in the class. 
 
 31 
 
Unit 4. Focused Group Discussion 
Student conduct a focused group discussion (individually or in groups as decided by the course teacher) 
either based on need diagnostic or problem -focused group study in any area of social relevance, and 
submit a report. Students will follow these steps-- selecting the theme, selecting the participants, deciding 
on time and location, preparing for and conducting focus group discussion, and submitting a report 
Books for study 
 Pfeiffer, J.W. & Jones, J.E. (1973). A Handbook of structured Experiences for Human Relations Training. 
San Diego, CA: University Associates Inc.  
 McNiff, J. (2002). Action Research: Principles and Practice.Houndsmills: Macmillan Education. Pines, 
A.M. & Maslach, C. (2002). Experiencing Social Psychology: Readings and Projects (4th ed.). New 
Delhi: Mc Graw Hill. 
 Breakwell, G.M. (2004). Doing Social Psychology Research. Malden, MA: British Psychological Society 
and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
 Krueger, R.A., & Casey, M.A. (2009). Focus Groups: A practical guide for Applied Research (4th ed.). 
Los Angeles: Sage Publications. 
 Litosselitti, L. (2003). Using Focus Groups in Research. New York, NY: Continuum.  
 Barbour, R. (2007). Doing Focus Groups. Los Angeles: Sage Publications.  
Books for reference 
 Bunk, A. P., & Van Vugt, M. (2007). Applying social psychology: From problems to solutions. 
London: Sage Publications.  
 Fiske, S.T., Gilbert, D.T., &Lindzey, G. (2010). Handbook of Social Psychology (5th Ed.). New 
Jersey: John Wiley and Sons Ltd.  
 Kruglanski, A. W., Higgins, E.T. (2007). Social Psychology: Handbook of basic Principles (Second 
Ed.). New York: The Guilford Press.  
 Lesko, W. A. (2009). Readings in Social Psychology: General, Classic and Contemporary 
Selections (Eighth Ed.). New Delhi: Pearson.  
 DeLamater, J.D., & Myers, D.J. (2011). Social Psychology (Seventh Ed.). USA: Wadsworth. 
 Fletcher, G.J.O., & Clark,M.S. (2003). Blackwell Handbook of Social Psychology: Interpersonal 
Processes. USA: Blackwell Publishers Ldt. 
 Baumeister. R. F. &Finkel, E. J. (Eds.) (2010).Advanced Social Psychology: State of the Science. 
New York: Oxford University Press.  
Evaluation: 
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 Field visit and placement: 15 Marks 
 Structured exercise: 10 Marks 
 Social/field experiment: 10 Marks 
 Focused group discussion: 15 Marks 
Semester end examination: 50 marks 
 Viva: 30 Marks 
 Exam: 20 Marks: Paper Pattern: 3 questions to be set of 10 marks each out of which 2 are to be attempted.  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 32 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Political Psychology 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04      Hours: 60 
 
Objective: 
1. To understand the psychological determinants of political behavior 
2. To analyze political data using behavioural methods 
3. Using psychological interventions for political and policy matters 
 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Summarize and demonstrate various models of the political psychology  
CO2: Analyse and Critically evaluate role of personality in politics 
CO3: Explain the Cognitions, Social Identity, Emotions, and Attitude in Political Psychology 
CO4: Evaluate and synthesize political behaviour in Indian context  
 
 
Unit 1: Introduction to Political Psychology 
A. Basics of Political Psychology  
B. Psychological Theories Political Theories  
C. Methods of political psychology 
 
Unit 2: Personality and Politics 
A. Theoretical Approaches Frameworks 
B. Modern Personality analyses  
C. Assessment of impact of personality 
 
Unit 3: Cognitions, Social Identity, Emotions, and Attitude in Political Psychology 
A. Information Processing Categorization 
B. Social Identity  
C. Affect and Emotions 
 
Unit 4: Political Psychology of Groups and Political Leader 
A. Nature, and influences in Group; Group decision making.  
B. Voting Behaviour and Psychology. Media and Political psychology 
C. Political Psychology of Political Experiments.  
D. Psychology of democracy.  
  
 
 33 
References: 
1. Cottam, M. Deilt-Ulher (2010) Introduction to Political Psychology. Lawrence Associates and Publisher. 
2. Jost, J. T. & Sidanious, J. (2004). Political Psychology: Key Readings. Psychology Press: NY. 
3. Sniderman, P. M; Brody, R. A. Tetlock, P. E. (2010) Reasoning And Choice: Explorations In Political 
Psychology. Cambridge: CUP. 
4. Roazen, P. (2003). Cultural Foundations of Political Psychology. Transaction Publishers. UK. 
 
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 One test of descriptive types OR Reflection papers: 20 marks 
 Essay on one of the topic randomly assigned  OR Reflection papers: 20 marks  
 One presentation/ Review Submission/ Project Submission: 10 marks 
 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be attempted. One of them 
could be a short note question. Questions could combine more than one unit 
 
 
  
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 34 
 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Behavioral Economics 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04      Hours: 60 
 
Objectives: 
 
1. To help learners to understand psychological aspects of economic behavior 
2. To help learners understand behavioral aspects of selfishness, rationality and preferences  
3. Understand and design policy implications of the Behavioral economics, and psychology 
 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Summarize and demonstrate various models of the Behavioral Economics  
CO2: Analyse and Critically evaluate role of psychology in Behavioral Economics 
CO3: Explain the Information, Uncertainty and Risk as well as Social and Psychological Dimension of 
Economics Behavior 
CO4: Evaluate and synthesize behavioural economics in Indian context  
 
 
Unit 1: Behavioral Economics and Real world Choices 
A. Assumptions of Economics and evaluations  
B. Game theory and Experimental Game theory 
C. Neuroeconomics; Evolutionary Psychology and Economic Psychology 
D. Conceptual Framework: Thinking automatically; Thinking socially; Thinking with mental models  
E. Methods of Behavioral Economics 
 
Unit 2: Information, Uncertainty and Risk  
A. Understanding Choice: Rational Choice theory  
B. Bracketing Decisions 
C. Heuristics and Biases Approach under uncertainty  
D. Decision under Risk and Uncertainty; Prospects Theory 
 
 
Unit 3: Social and Psychological Dimension of Economics Behavior 
A. Selfishness and altruism 
B. Fairness and Psychological Games  
C. Trust and Reciprocity 
D. Motivation and Incentives; Personality, Mood, and Motivation. Culture. 
 
 
 
 35 
 
 
Unit 4: Behavioral Economics and Policy: Psychological and social perspectives 
A. Poverty 
B. Behavioral Finance; Household finance  
C. Auctions 
D. Economic Behavioral and Public Policy; Behavior in macroeconomy  
E. Lessons from Behavioral Economics 
 
References: 
1. Wilkinson, N. and Klaes, M. (2012). An Introduction to Behavioral Economics. Palgrave Macmillan 
Lewis, A. (2008). The Cambridge Handbook of Psychology and Economic Behaviour. CUP: Cambridge, 
New York. 
2. World Bank Group (2015). Mind, Society, And Behavior. DC: International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development. 
3. Agarwal, B. and Vercelli, A. (2005) Psychology, rationality, and economic behaviour : challenging 
standard assumptions . Palgrave Macmillan: NY 
4. Just, D. R. (2014). Introduction To Behavioral Economics Noneconomic Factors That Shape Economic 
Decisions. Wiely: NY 
5. Diamond, P. & Vartiainen, H. (Eds.)(2007) Behavioral Economics and Its Applications. Princeton 
University Press: NJ. 
6. Ikeda, Kato, H. K., Ohtake, F. Tsutsui, Y. (Eds). (2016). Behavioral Economics of Preferences, Choices, 
and Happiness. Springer; Japan. 
7. Wendel, S. (2014). Designing for Behavior Change: Applying Psychology and Behavioral Economics. 
Oreal: Beging. 
8. Akerlof, G. A. and Shiller, R. J. (2016). Phishing for Phools – The Economics of Manipulation and 
Deception. Princeton University Press. 
9. Cartwrite; E. (2011). Behavioural Economics. Routledge: Oxon. 
10. Camerer C. F. (2011) Advances in Behavioural Economics. Princeton University Press: Princeton. 
Altman, M. (2007). Handbook of Contemporary Behavioral Economics: Foundations and Developments. 
Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limit: NY. 
11. Camerer, C. F. (2003). Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction. Princeton 
University Press. Princeton. 
12. Frey, B. S. & Stutzer, A. (2010). Economics and Psychology - A Promising New Cross-Disciplinary 
Field (CESifo Seminar Series). MIT Press 
 
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 One test of descriptive types OR Reflection papers: 20 marks 
 Essay on one of the topic randomly assigned  OR Reflection papers: 20 marks  
 One presentation/ Review Submission/ Project Submission: 10 marks 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 are to be attempted. One of them 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 36 
 
could be a short note question. Questions could combine more than one unit 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Advanced Skills and Processes of Counselling and Psychotherapy 
Type of course: Elective 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04      Hours: 60 
Objectives 
1. Building students capacity in understanding and using the basic and advanced skills for 
counseling and psychotherapy 
2. Building students capacity in understanding and using therapeutic process and related aspects for 
counseling and psychotherapy 
3. Assist students practice these skills and techniques 
4. Developing professional skills required for independent practitioner 
 
Course Outcomes (CO):  
CO1: Demonstrate skills for counselling and psychotherapy  
CO2: Carry out Therapeutic assessment, Contracting and demonstrate skills initiating therapy 
CO3: Explain the process of counselling and psychotherapy.  
CO4: Evaluate conditions for Termination and Follow-up and Documentationand demonstrate skills.  
 
Methods: 
This course will be taught by using methods like teaching, role play, simulated cases, group discussion, 
self-work, videotaped sessions of role play. Classroom activities, homework activities and 
assignments are expected to be used. In addition, individual psychological support for self-work to 
learner may be provided if needed. Classroom Teaching and individual group work sessions are 
primary methods of learning. Number of students admitted should not be more than 10 in practice 
sessions. A new batch may be schedule for practice components above 10. 
 
Unit I: Skills for Counseling and Psychotherapy 
A. Basic Skills: Empathy, Genuineness, unconditional positive regard, congruence, 
B. Listening, paraphrasing, reflecting, summarizing 
C. Advanced Skills: interpretation, insight, transference interpretation, exploring projections, 
identifying failure of therapy, identifying working with burnout, self- supervision, 
confrontation 
D. Characteristics of effective counselor/ therapists 
E. Issues faced be young therapist 
 
Unit II: Therapeutic assessment, Contracting and initiating therapy 
A. Therapeutic assessment, History taking, and Formulation, setting goals. 
B. Contracting and its implications 
C. Skills for opening and closing sessions 
D. Initial session, crisis and support. 
 
 
 37 
Unit III: Process of Counselling and Psychotherapy 
A. Initial phase: Psych- education, Supportive psychotherapy. Selecting techniques 
B. Ice-breaking, exploration, Loss framework. 
C. Dealing with Resistance: Techniques and applications 
D. Transference and counter-transference 
Unit IV: Termination and Follow-up and Documentation 
A. Termination: Evaluating and sharing progress, Issues in termination and resolution 
B. Follow-up: Systems and techniques, sustained changes 
C. Documentation: Therapists documentation, Communication with other professionals and 
referrals 
D. Legal implications: Legalities with therapy and Legal communication, documentation. 
Books 
1. Faiver, C., Eisengart, S., Colonna, S. (2003).The counselor intern’s handbook.Pacific Grove, CA: 
Brooks/Cole Publishing Company. 
2. Martin, D. G. (2011). Counseling and Therapy Skills. NY: Waveland Pr In. 
3. Moursund, J., & Kenny, M. C. (2002). The Process of Counseling and Therapy (4th ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
4. Wolberg, L. R. (2005). The Technique of Psychotherapy Part I and II. NJ: Jason Aronson Inc. 
Books for references. 
1. Archer, J., & McCarthy, C. J. (2008). Theories of Counseling and Psychotherapy: Contemporary. 
Applications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice Hall 
2. Corey, G. (2012). Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy.Californa: Brooks/ Cole 
Publishing. 
3. Keeran, D. (2009). Effective Counseling Skills: The practical wording of therapeutic statements and 
processes.CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. 
4. Neukrug, E.S. (2010). Counseling Theory and Practice. Brooks/Cole, Brooks/Cole, Cengage 
Learning 
5. Hutchinson D. R. (2011). The Counseling Skills Practice Manual. New Delhi: SAGE Publications Inc. 
6. Sommers-Flanagan, J. &Sommers-Flanagan, R. (2012). Counseling and Psychotherapy Theories in 
Context and Practice: Skills, Strategies, and Techniques. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
5. Morrison, J. (2007). The First Interview (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
7. Perry, W. (2008). Basic Counseling Techniques: A Beginning Therapist's Tool Kit (2nd ed.). 
Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse. 
Evaluation:  
Internal evaluation: 50 marks 
 One test of descriptive types OR Reflection papers: 20 marks 
 Essay on one of the topic randomly assigned  OR Reflection papers: 20 marks  
 One presentation/ Review Submission/ Project Submission: 10 marks 
Semester-end examination: 50 marks  
Paper pattern: 7 questions to be set of 10 marks each, out of which 5 questions to be attempted. One of 
them could be a short note question. Questions could combine more than one unit 
 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 38 
 
 
 
 
 
SEM III: Research Project Course 
Research Project Course (Credits 4) 
 Research Project in Psychology I: Preparing Research Proposal (4 Cr) 
 
 
  
 
 39 
M.A (Psychology) 
(Under NEP2020) 
Course Name: Research Project in Psychology I: Preparing Research Proposal 
Type of course: Mandatory 
SEMESTER: III       Level: 6.5 
Credit: 04      Hours: 60 
Objectives:  
1. Develop research problem and work on literature review 
2. Convert the research problem in initial research plan 
3. Convert the research proposal into complete executable research proposal with review 
process.  
 
Course Outcomes (CO) 
CO1: Develop understanding of a search problem 
CO2: Evaluate various alternative solution and narrow down on few specific solutions 
CO3: Write a initial research plan under the supervision.  
CO4: Develop and defend the research proposal through supervision and review process.  
 
Background: The research project component runs through semester three and semester 
four. To complete learning from this component, students will have to carry out a research 
project in both the semester under the guidance of the supervisor assigned to them by the 
process defined below. In semester three, the research project component will involve 
preparing the research proposal. In semester four, students will have to collect data on the 
research proposal that is approved in semester three. In semester four, they will also have 
to analyse the data, write report, and make presentation on the basis of their research 
project. Learners have to submit a dissertation to the Department at the end of semester 4. 
Learners can choose topics from theoretical or applied areas of psychology through the 
process defined below. They can use qualitative, quantitative, mix method, et cetera, 
approaches to conceptualize, collect, and analyse their data. It is expected that the research 
project is of the quality and rigor expected from a full year work since both semesters are 
assigned to carry out the research project. Open science approach is strongly encouraged in 
the research.  
 
Process of research Project 
The research project course will be in the form of a dissertation based on a research 
assignment related to the specific discipline of the psychology. 
 
Research Guides: Every Teacher from Psychology department/MA Centers will announce 
four to five broad topics at the beginning of the second semester, reflecting degree of 
relevance and rigor suitable to a post graduate programme, along with an indicative 
 
NEP SYLLABUS PSYCHOLOGY SEM III & IV 40 
 
reading list. These will be screened by the department in the subject and a final list of 
approved topics along with a reading list will be displayed in the first week of the third 
semester. 
 
The student will submit a list of his/her three most preferred topics and research guide in the 
order of preference by the second week of the third semester to the Head of the 
department. 
 
Masters Research Project Committee: The department shall have a Masters Research 
Project Committee (MRPC) consisting of the Head of the Department (Chairperson) and 
two other teachers from the department. The purpose of this committee is to oversee the 
functioning of the project component in the department over the two semesters.  
 
Guides and Guide Assignment: All post graduate teachers (excluding visiting faculty, and 
faculty available for only one semester) in the department will be guides for the project 
component. All teachers shall have equal number of students allotted for the dissertation.  
In case, a particular topic is preferred by more students, the project committee will allocate 
students to guides within the department in order of the average of marks obtained in 
semesters I and II. In case if Sem II marks are not available for all students due to non-
declaration of results, only Semester I mark shall be used. In case both semesters’ marks 
are not available due to non-declaration of results, then the MA admission merit list shall 
be used.  
If it is felt necessary, the project committee can assign a co-guide to a student, depending 
upon specific disciplinary needs.  
 
Guiding Process:  
The research guide has to have weekly meeting with every student. For this purpose, 10 
students are considered as one batch of students. Through the regular discussion with the 
research guide.    
 
First Proposal Presentation: The student will make a preliminary presentation for approval 
of broad topic and methodology in or before the sixth week of the third semester. The 
presentation will be attended by the guide/s and a committee consisting of two other 
teachers from the department. The committee will make necessary suggestions to improve 
the dissertation. If need be, subcommittees can be formed for this purpose.  
 
Final Proposal Presentation: The student will make a final presentation in the 10th to the 
12th week of third semester. The presentation will be evaluated by the same committee 
 
 41 
that evaluated the preliminary presentation. The presentation will contain the complete 
proposal for the research project the student is carrying out. The student shall submit the 
hard copy of the research proposal.  
 
Decision by the committee: The committee shall approve OR suggest minor modifications 
(need to completed with research guide and only letter of the same effect is submitted to 
the head by student through guide) OR suggest major modifications (need to completed 
with research guide and fresh presentation is made to the committee). The committee shall 
also issue a letter for ethical clearance for the study. The APA guidelines (or suitable 
adaptation by the department) for evaluating ethics shall be used.  
 
Evaluation: Total: 100 marks 
External Evaluation 
 First Proposal Presentation: 20 Marks (Evaluated by Committee) 
 Final Proposal Presentation: 30 Marks (Evaluated by Committee) 
Internal Evaluation 
 Internal Evaluation Proposal Copy: 25 Marks (Evaluated by Research Guide) 
 Internal Evaluation (Based on originality, understanding of theory and method, 
regularity, sincerity, and organized work): 25 Marks (Evaluated by Research Guide) 
 
Failure in this paper imply that the student has to repeat process (internal/external/ or both 
depending of failure type) of Semester III outlined above in subsequent year when the 
semester is running.  
 
 
The marks given by the three members of the evaluation committee will be averaged in each 
head and the total marks decided by totaling the averages under the three heads for the 
committee evaluation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 